  Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science

                        Master’s Degree in
                  Artificial Intelligence Systems




                      Final Dissertation



Self-Evolving Software Agents: An
       LLM-Based Approach

 Supervisor                                             Student
Paolo Giorgini                                      Francesco Vaccari
Marco Robol




                    Academic year 2023/2024
                  Acknowledgements




...thanks to...
Contents

Abstract                                                                                                  2

1 Introduction                                                                                            3

2 Background                                                                                               5
  2.1 Software Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
  2.2 Autonomous Software Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           6
  2.3 BDI Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
  2.4 Large Language Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
      2.4.1 Applications of LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           8
  2.5 Self-Evolving Software Agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        11

3 Architecture                                                                                            12
  3.1 Perception Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     13
  3.2 Control Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14
  3.3 Implementation Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        16
      3.3.1 BDI Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          16
      3.3.2 Desire Outcomes during Generation and Triggering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              19
      3.3.3 Intention Outcomes during Generation and Triggering . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               19
      3.3.4 Prompting the LLM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           22
      3.3.5 About the environment-agnosticism of the agent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              24
      3.3.6 Architecture Configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25

4 Experiments                                                                                             26
  4.1 Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
  4.2 Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
  4.3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
      4.3.1 Results of the Evolution Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          28
      4.3.2 Analysis of Desires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       32
      4.3.3 Quantitative Analysis of Intentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         35
      4.3.4 Qualitative Analysis of Intentions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        38
      4.3.5 Analysis of Intentions With Calls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         55

5 Conclusion                                                                                              57

Bibliography                                                                                              59




                                                     1
Abstract
Software evolution involves adapting systems to new requirements, introducing functionalities that
are fundamentally new and that extend the capabilities of the system. Automating this process holds
great potential, reducing the need of human expertise and improving scalability. Recent advancements
in Large Language Models (LLMs) seem to be promising in achieving such automation, as they are
able to reason and generate code. This thesis explores the development of an autonomous software
agent capable of evolving to address new self-proposed requirements in a dynamic environment. Using
a BDI-based architecture adapted for the use of LLMs, the agent can identify, define, and implement
new goals, learning how to reach them over time. The proposed framework automates tasks such as
knowledge integration, goal generation, and plan execution, leveraging the LLM to guide its software
evolution process. The agent’s capabilities were tested in a game-like environment, with the main
purpose of collecting and delivering parcels. Results indicate partial success, with the agent managing
to generate and achieve goals but remaining dependent on the LLM. The architecture proposed is an
attempt in automating software evolution, highlighting challenges and future improvements to enhance
learning and problem-solving abilities of autonomous agents.




                                                  2
1        Introduction
Software evolution is the process through which a software system adapts to new and changing re-
quirements over time. It does not only consist of minor adaptations or updates, but also involves
the introduction of entirely new functionalities that allow the software to perform tasks that were
not previously possible. This difference sets apart the concepts of software evolution and software
adaptation: the former expands at a fundamental level the capabilities of the system rather than
simply modifying the existing ones. A parallelism can be made between software systems, as seen in
the traditional sense of, for example, commercial applications, and autonomous agents that operate
in a dynamic environment. In both cases, evolving requirements are introduced due to external fac-
tors that influence the needs of new requirements. For a software agent, this influence comes from
the enviornment that, through its elements that change over time, pushes the agent to modify its
behaviour. In conventional software systems the need for change can instead come from users that
demand new functionalities to be introduced or from market trends that drive the change. This as-
pect of interaction between the system and the external factors that influence change is the basis for
the process of software evolution. For instance, an agent may encounter situations that require it to
develop previously undefined behaviors that allow it to achieve the new desirable state. This mirrors
how commercial software must evolve to meet emerging demands. By replicating and automating the
software evolution process in software agents, it is possible to gain insights on how the same can be
achieved with traditional software systems, easing the work of developers, and making the process
require less expertise.
    The traditional software development process requires a lot of work to interpret and define re-
quirements, implement them through code, test the implementation, and perform the necessary main-
tenance operations over time. Automation of this process would bring great benefits, but is very
challenging due to the human expertise required. However, Large Language Models (LLMs) might be
able to replace this expertise, especially considering that in the last years they have been the focus of
development resources in big tech companies that see the future of Artificial Intelligence in intelligent
chatbots. If automation is ever achieved, it could make the process accessible to both experts and non-
experts, improving efficiency and scalability. Moreover, applications in robotic agents that operate
in unpredictable environments would benefit from a paradigm that allows them to learn and improve
their behaviour and planning capabilities. LLMs seem to be a promising solution for automating
software evolution due to their reasoning skills and their ability to generate code, identifying, defining,
and implementing new requirements to increase the functionalities of the software system at hand.
This proposition has been tested in numerous articles, for example in [2], where the authors test the
ability of ChatGPT [25] and Bard, the predecessor of Gemini [32], in a series of tasks that are usually
part of the software development process, concluding that results are promising but not without issues
that are recognized in the literature as common limitations of LLMs.
    This thesis aims to develop an autonomous software agent capable of evolving by acquiring new
abilities that allow it to achieve the goals identified. To leverage large language models in automating
the software evolution process, the BDI paradigm was used as the basis for the autonomous agent
proposed. This framework allows the agent to perceive the environment and to store the information
received. This information is then used to propose new requirements which are then satisfied with
the code generated by the LLM. The architecture developed implementes an iterative process that
not only acts on the environment, but also evalutes the results of its actions. The framework guides
the LLM through generation of various elements required for the agent to function, from functions
that integrate the events perceived into its knowledge, to textual descriptions of the new objectives
that should be pursued. In its evolution process, the agent learns how to produce the plans that lead
to achievement of its goals, first by leveraging the LLM, and then by using the generated code in
complete autonomy. The learning process should ultimately produce a software agent that is capable

                                                    3
of satisfying a series of goals that were not previousely defined, and that has the ability to pursue and
achieve them later without the intervention of the LLM or of any other entity.
     To evaluate the effectiveness of the developed architecture, a series of experiments were designed
to test the agent in a game-like environment. In this environment, the main purpose of the agent is to
move on the map to collect and deliver parcels that increase its personal score. The environment can be
configured to contain other objects that can be interacted with, in order to assess the problem-solving
abilities of the agent guided by the LLM. For each experiment, a series of objectives was chosen to judge
whether the agent’s self-proposed goals were aligned with human common sense and intuition. The
analysis performed shows that the agent is indeed capable of evolving in its requirements, completing
most of the tasks given, but is not able to fully learn how to reach them without the help of the LLM,
failing in this sense in its learning process.
     Overall, this thesis demonstrates an initial step towards automation of the software evolution
process through the use an LLM-based BDI architecture that implements an autonomous software
agent. This agent, although capable of evolving its requirements, satisfying them, and reaching the
desired objectives set for most experiments, reamins limited in its learning abilities.

   The thesis is divided into the following chapters:

   • Background: This chapter defines the agent developed by discussing its various aspects, from
     the concept of software evolution and the relevant topics in the software engineering field, to
     its implementation with the BDI model adapted to be used in unison with a Large Language
     Model.

   • Architecture: The BDI adaptation is explained in depth, with descriptions of the perception and
     control units that constitute the agent. Implementation details are then discussed, for example
     with the types of prompts used or the possible configurations of the architecture. This chapter
     also contains a lenghty explanation on the interpretation of desires and intentions, as well as the
     generation steps they go through and the possible outcomes of the process.

   • Experiments: This chapter first describes the environment designed to test the autonomous
     agent developed, with an explanation on the actions that the agent can perform and what are
     their effects on the objects that are spawned on the map. Then, the various typologies of
     experiments conducted are illustrated, with an analysis of the results obtained both in terms of
     tasks completed and learned abilities, and in terms of quality of the generated code by the LLM.

   • Conclusion: Finally, some considerations are made about the capabilities of the agent proposed,
     with suggestions about future work, and with an in-depth discussion on possible improvements
     that could fix the issues and limitations observed in the experiments performed.

   The code implementation is available on GitHub: https://github.com/francesco-vaccari/
Deliveroo2.




                                                   4
2         Background
2.1      Software Evolution
As Lehman explained in 1980 [21], each program has a life cycle in which it goes through the stages
of definition, implementation and maintenance, where changes are made to the software constantly.
The pressure for these change comes from “organizational and environmental feedback”1 , meaning that
there are external factors that lead to the software being changed and thus evolving in its requirements.
Lehman, in his software evolution laws, initially proposed in 1978 [20], then refined in 1980 [21], and
revisited again in 1996 [19], aims to model the evolution process of the so-called E-type programs,
which are defined as “programs [that] are reflections of human processes or of a part of the real world”2 .
Changes happen if there is a need for them, and in the context of this thesis this need is given by
the environment that introduces new elements to an agent that must adapt and evolve to satisfy new
requirements.
    The agent architecture developed can be recognized as part of the category of E-type programs,
and it is possible to identify the evolution of the agent as a software evolution process, altough no
human-driven developlment is involved, unlike the study cases analyzed in the literature. Here, the
evolution is indeed pressured by changes in the environment, but is then carried out with the help of
a Large Language Model (LLM).
    To define the type of software evolution considered in this thesis, we can look at the numerous
taxonomies of software change that have been proposed, for example in Types of software evolution and
software maintenance [7] and Towards a taxonomy of software change [6]. Using these categorizations,
it is possible to classify the type of change by analyzing what changed and how it changed. The
software agent changes whenever new LLM-proposed goals are introduced, which are influenced by
the elements present in the environment, meaning that the agent itself indirectly reacts to changes
in the environment. The evolution is fully autonomous from this aspect, without needing external
human intervention to create, validate, deploy, and evaluate the changes made. Regarding the temporal
properties of change, the agent evolves continuosly but is constrained by the LLM’s generation speed,
which is not instantaneous. The changes can be mainly categorized as enhancing the abilites of
the agent, with a limited quantity of corrective changes that are performed to fix errors in function
executions.
    A major difference has to be considered when defining the concept of software evolution as it was
imagined for the work of this thesis. The changes cannot be said to be applied to the code itself,
but rather to the system that constitutes the agent. The code is not evolved by modifying it, but by
generating new code that is aligned with the new requirements that evolve over time. This is a key
difference that sets apart the software evolution process defined here from the one described in the
literature.
    Maintenance, which is recognized in the articles mentioned above as a key aspect and the most
demanding phase, does not play such a big role in the evolution of the proposed agent. However,
this does not mean that maintenance actions are not performed, but rather that it is not the main
focus. For example, when the agent achieves a goal, the code generated that was used to reach that
objective is kept for future use, and it is possible that it will be executed again. If that is the case,
the code will undergo an additional evaluation phase to check if it is still valid and if it can be reused
again. This form of maintenance allows the agent to remove unwanted behaviors that may have been
present in the code but were not detected during the first execution. This maintenance phase is not
as significant as described in the literature, but it is still necessary for the agent to evolve correctly.
   1
    Meir M. Lehman, Programs, life cycles, and laws of software evolution, p.8
   2
    Israel Herraiz, Daniel Rodriguez, Gregorio Robles, Jesus M Gonzalez-Barahona, The evolution of the laws of software
evolution: A discussion based on a systematic literature review, p.6


                                                          5
   In summary, this thesis aims to automate the software evolution process by developing an agent
architecture that is capable of achieving new self-proposed requirements, with the help of an LLM
that acts as a reasoning and planning system. The agent evolves in its abilities and behaviors by
generating new code that is aligned with the new requirements, while also maintaining its library of
previously generated code in order to make use of it in the future.


2.2       Autonomous Software Agents
The concept of agent can be traced back to the work of Hewitt in 1977 [14] in which he presents an
“approach to modelling intelligence in terms of a society of communicating knowledge-based problem-
solving experts”3 . These experts are later referred to as actors defined by their ability to perform
actions and to retain internal knowledge. These two aspects are also clearly present in the agent
architecture developed, where the agent consists of a control unit responsible for executing actions
and a perception unit that is in charge of processing incoming information and maintaining the agent’s
internal representation of the environment.
    Over the years, the notion of agent has evolved, yet no clear definition has been universally agreed
upon in the literature. In 1996, Nwana [24] defines an agent as

        “a component of software and/or hardware which is capable of acting exactingly in order
        to accomplish tasks on behalf of its user”4 .

However, as the author points out immediately after, it is more appropriate to say that the term agent
is

        “an umbrella term, meta-term or class, which covers a range of other more specific agent
        types”5

and thus it is preferable to define an agent by listing and analyzing its attributes. This kind of definition
allows to classify agents based on their distinguishable properties that can be used to differentiate
between types. The author identifies the following categories:

      • Mobile or Static: Agents that can move around in the environment are classified as mobile
        agents, while those without this ability are considered static agents.

      • Deliberative or Reactive: Agents that “possess an internal symbolic, reasoning model and
        [...] engage in planning and negotiation”6 fall into the category of deliberative agents, while
        reactive agents do not have this internal representation of the environment and instead act by
        reacting directly to the perceptions received.

      • Autonomous: Autonomous agents can act without external intervention, following internal
        goals and objectives. An important aspect of autonomous agents is their proactivity, meaning
        that they can take the initiative in planning to achieve their goals.

      • Collaborative: Agents that can interact with others are defined as social agents, and the ability
        to communicate, coordinate and cooperate towards a common goal is a key aspect of this type
        of agents.

      • Smart: Smart agents are defined by the author as capable of learning as they react to the
        environment and act on it. The temporal component is taken into consideration for this category,
        as the agent might be able to improve its performance over time as a result of learning from its
        interactions.
  3
    Carl Hewitt, Viewing control structures as patterns of passing messages, p.1
  4
    Hyacinth S. Nwana, Software agents: An overview, p.6
  5
    Hyacinth S. Nwana, Software agents: An overview, p.6
  6
    Hyacinth S. Nwana, Software agents: An overview, p.6


                                                          6
The agent developed can be identified as mobile since it moves into a virtual environment, deliberative
as it has a model of the external environment and can reason on it to plan which actions to take,
autonomous as it does not require to be guided from an external entity to perform its tasks, and smart
as it can learn from the interactions it experiences. The agent cannot be classified as collaborative
since, at least in this thesis, it does not interact with other agents as there are none in the environment
created.
    In 1995, Wooldridge and Jennings [37] admit that defining what is an agent is a difficult task as
there is not an universally accepted definition, but propose two categories of agency that are, once
again, based on the agent’s properties:

      • Weak Notion of Agency. Agents are characterized by their ability to act autonomously, to
        interact with other agents and to perceive and react to changes happening in the environment,
        while still showing proactive behavior towards goal achievement. This definition is similar to the
        classification by attributes proposed by Nwana.

      • Strong Notion of Agency. Strong agency is characterized by human-like “mentalistic notions,
        such as knowledge, belief, intention, and obligation”7 . This particular definition is cited by the
        authors themselves and is from Shoham, 1993 [31].

Regarding the agent proposed here, it can be definitely classified as a strong agent, as its model, as
well as the definition, is inspired by the BDI mdoel, which will be explained in the next section.
   Up to this point we have seen how it is possible to define an agent, but we have not explained
exactly what is the difference between a software agent and an autonomous one. In 1996, Franklin
and Graesser [12] propose a clear definition that distinguishes the two:

        “An autonomous agent is a system situated within and a part of an environment that
        senses that environment and acts on it, over time, in pursuit of its own agenda and so as
        to effect what it senses in the future.”8

As the authors explain, an autonomous agent does not have to be a program; it could be a robot
or even a human being. In contrast, a software agent is inherently a program. This categorizes
software agents as a subset of autonomous agents. Four key properties of an autonomous agent can
be identified: reactivity, autonomy, goal-oriented behavior, and temporal continuity. These attributes
align with those discussed by Nwana, Wooldridge, and Jennings, and can all be found in the agent
architecture presented in this thesis.

2.3       BDI Model
The BDI model is a software model that is used to design and program agents. It is based on the ideas
first introducted by Bratman in 1987 [3], which then he refined in 1988 [4]. This initial concept was
further developed by the work of Georgeff and Rao in 1991 [27], 1995 [28], and in 1996 with Kinny as
co-author [18], leading to a more modern formalization of agents based on the BDI paradigm.
     A Belief-Desire-Intention (BDI) agent is a type of rational agent that reflects the notion of strong
agency:

        “Agents are viewed as having certain mental attitudes: Beliefs, Desires, and Intentions,
        which represent, respectively, their informational, motivational, and deliberative states.”9

Desires are referred to as the goals set that the agent may adopt, while the intentions are seen as the
plans set that the agent may employ to achieve those goals. Beliefs are the information about the
environment or about the agent itself that are described in the agent’s belief set. These components,
implemented as data structures, are used by the agent, called the BDI-Interpreter by Georgeff and
Rao [28], in a continuous loop that aims to achieve the agent’s goals, as shown in Algorithm 1.
  7
    Michael Wooldridge, Nicholas R. Jennings, Intelligent agents: Theory and practice, p.5
  8
    Stan Franklin, Art Graesser, Is it an Agent, or just a Program?: A Taxonomy for Autonomous Agents, p.25
  9
    Anand S. Rao, Michael P. Georgeff, BDI agents: from theory to practice., p.1


                                                       7
Algorithm 1 BDI-Interpreter
 1: initialize-state();
 2: repeat
 3:    options := option-generator(event-queue);
 4:    selected-options := deliberate(options);
 5:    update-intentions(selected-options);
 6:    execute();
 7:    get-new-external-events();
 8:    drop-successful-attitudes();
 9:    drop-impossible-attitudes();
10: end repeat



     The event queue contains the events perceived by the agent, which are stored until the agent
processes them. In each iteration, the agent generates and selects possible options and updates the
intentions based on this decision. Actions are then executed as intentions dictate and new events are
added to the queue. Finally, a revision of intentions and desires is performed to remove the ones that
are now satisfied or impossible to achieve.
     A more modern pseudo-code specification of a BDI agent [33] is shown in Algorithm 2, where ρ
represents the events received from the environment. The general concepts remain the same, but the
implementation is more detailed and structured. Just like before, there is an initialization procedure
of the agent followed by the main loop. The order of operations is not the same, but most can
still be recognized easily. After having initialized the beliefs and intentions set, the agent proceeds
to enter the main loop. In each iteration, the agent receives the new events from the environment,
here represented by the percept ρ, and integrates the information that they carry in the belief set
through the operation of beliefs revision. In this step the agent’s knowledge is not only updated,
but also checked against the new available observation and is changed accordingly. Then the options
generation and deliberation steps are performed to select the best goal and plan to execute through
the use of desires and intentions. The plan is then executed action by action, and for each one the
agent checks if the goal has been reached or if it is necessary to reconsider the plan, in case it is now
impossible to achieve or if it is not the best option anymore. Once the plan execution terminates,
the agent goes back to the beginning of the loop with a new beliefs revision step and the process is
repeated.


2.4     Large Language Models
Large Language Models (LLMs) are deep learning models built for natural language processing tasks.
In the field of NLP, they can be considered the successors of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [29],
with special importance given to Bidirectional RNNs [30], and Long Short-Term Memory networks
(LSTMs) [15]. LLMs revolutionized the field with their ability to capture and model the relationships
between words, or tokens, in a text sequence. They were introduced in 2017 [35] and have since then
become the state-of-the-art in NLP, with growing pupularity and usage in many applications. Their
success is also a result of the training technique employed, which is based on unsupervised learning
on very large datasets [26], which yields very powerful models that can be later fine-tuned on specific
tasks. Models like BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) [10] set new
benchmarks in many NLP tasks and were followed by the famous GPT models, one of which is used
in this thesis.

2.4.1   Applications of LLMs
Large Language Models are used in many applications, with one of the most famous examples be-
ing chatbots, which have become more and more popular after the announcement of ChatGPT in
November 2022 [25], which is based on the GPT-3 model developed by OpenAI [5]. Other notable and
publicly available models that act as chatbots are LLAMA from Meta [34] and Gemini from Google
[32]. The tasks that these models are capable of performing are many, ranging from creative writing

                                                   8
Algorithm 2 Standard BDI agent model pseudocode
 1: B ← {β1 , ..., β2 }                                                ▷ Initial beliefs-knowledge base
 2: I ← {ι1 , ..., ι2 }                                                      ▷ Initial intentions-desires
 3: while True do
 4:    get ρ                                                                                    ▷ Input
 5:    B ← belief sRevision(B, ρ)
 6:    D ← options(B, I)
 7:    I ← f ilter(B, D, I)                                                        ▷ Derived intentions
 8:    π ← plan(B, I)
 9:    while not [or empty(π)
10:               or succeded(I, B)
11:               or impossible(I, B)] do
12:        α ← head(π)
13:        return α
14:        π ← tail(π)                                                                       ▷ Output
15:        get ρ                                                                         ▷ Update of ρ
16:        B ← belief sRevision(B, ρ)
17:        if reconsider(I, B) then                                                ▷ Caution condition
18:            D ← options(B, I)
19:            I ← f ilter(B, D, I)
20:        end if
21:        if not sound(π, I, B) then                                                    ▷ Plan update
22:            π ← plan(B, I)
23:        end if
24:    end while
25: end while



of stories or poems, to more technical and formal generation of text like summaries of articles or code
snippets.
    For this thesis, the interest goes to applications of LLMs in the field of software engineering,
autonomous agents, and related to reasoning and planning for problem solving tasks. In the context
of LLMs that assist developers, we find once again OpenAI that developed Codex [8] that is the basis
for GitHub Copilot [11], a tool that can be used for code generation and completion, through the
use of LLMs that have been fine-tuned specifically to learn the alignment between natural language
and code. Tools like these are spreading in the software development community and are hinting
at a future where the entire software development process could be automated through the use of
specialized models that interpret requiremenets and generate entire software systems with minimal
human intervention. The work of this thesis goes in the same direction, but with a focus on LLM-based
agents that use the generated code to navigate and interact with their virtual environment.
    Modern implementations of LLMs are capable of more sophisticated applications. For example,
in [2] the authors test ChatGPT and Bard, the predecessor of Gemini, in a series of tasks that are
commonly part of the software development process: requirements definition, design of a solution, and
implementation and testing of said solution. The results show that the models are promising, but
with some limitations that are recognized on a more broad level in the literature. LLMs need to be
prompted in a specific way to obtain desirable results, and the large domains that a real application
involves are not easily handled by the models due to technical limitations of the input size. And even
if scaling is possible, it does not come without challenges such as reduced quality of generation and
increased computational costs. Another problem tackled in [23] refers to how solutions proposed by
LLMs seem to be correct but often do not work as intended. A function that is almost correct is,
unfortunately, still an incorrect solution that produces the same result of a completely wrong solution.
The techniques, strategies, and frameworks employed to obtain a correct solution are many, elaborate,
and most importantly shift the burden of the debugging process from the LLM to the end user. This
problem, called by the authors the “near miss syndrome” or “last mile gap”, is addressed with a

                                                   9
framework that iteratively executes and debugs canditate solutions generated by the LLM. Another
approach to solve this issue is proposed in [13] where a genetic programming approach is used. The
authors propose a system where a population of code is generated, executed, and evaluated to select
the best performing candidates that go through the process of mutation and recombination to create a
new population that replaces the old one, in a continuous loop that should lead to working solutions. A
recurring theme is the need for approaches that include a feedback loop that, through many iterations,
allow the LLM to slowly fill in the gap between a working solution and a non-working one.
    To summarize the strengths and weaknesses of LLMs in software engineering, [17] provides a
literature review that discusses the potential of LLMs in automating the software development process.
LLMs are promising in the task of requirement generation, but their general purpose training might
harm the quality of results especially when dealing with complex and technical information. In code
generation the accuracy of code cannot be ensured, even when using fine-tuned and specialized models.
Similar problems also arise when generating testing software as coverage and correct interpretation
cannot be guaranteed. There is still potential for LLMs to evolve in this field and to truly and fully
automate the software development process.
    LLMs can also be adapted to play the role of reasoning or planning engines. In these kinds of
applications, prompt engineering is necessary to obtain the desired results. One example is the few-shot
prompting technique used in [5] that provides few examples of input-output pairs to guide the model
to correct solutions. Another technique that builds on top of few-shot prompting is chain-of-thought
prompting [36], which adds to the question a series of intermediate steps in an attempt to explain
what is the desired reasoning path that should be taken to produce a correct result. In planning tasks,
LLMs are used to generate series of actions that should be taken to solve the given problem. However,
similarly to the problem of code generation, the plans produced often are semantically correct, but
cannot be actually executed. This kind of problem is addressed in [16] where the authors suggest
some strategies to map the proposed plan into an admissible one, as shown by the results of the
experiments conducted in which executability is improved from 18% to 79%. Another approach that
does not involve generating directly plans is demostrated in [22] where the LLM is used to create a
planning domain description language (PPDL) specification that is then given to classical planners to
generate the plan. This indirect approach is more successful in generating executable plans, as long
as the created file is correctly formatted, but it also less likely to produce a semantically sound plan.
    An interesting article that has been the main inspiration for the work of this thesis is about
Augmentic Autotelic Agents with Large Language Models [9]. The peculiarity of autotelic agents is
that they are capable of setting their own goals. This capability is empowered by LLMs that, as the
authors state, are

       “an imperfect model of human cultural transmission; an attempt to capture aspects of
       humans’ common-sense, intuitive physics and overall interests.”10

LLMs can be seen as a summary of human knowledge, a representation of human reasoning and
planning that can be used to make human-aligned decisions. The authors propose a framework that
implements an iterative process to populate a set of policies that consist of series of actions that the
agent can take to achieve the associated goals. This structure is similar to the one used in the agent
developed and illustrated in the BDI model, where the agent has a set of goals (desires) and a set
of plans to achieve them (intentions). Another concept that has been taken from this article is the
idea of chaining multiple plans to obtain more complex goals. This is similar to what can be done
with intentions: to achieve a goal, the agent can generate and execute more that one intention, each
one bringing the agent closer to its objective. This decomposition of goals into smaller sub-goals is
common in planning tasks, and is here implemented by the LLM that proposes not only the final
long-term goal, represented by the desire, but also the short-term sub-goals that are realized by the
intentions.

  10
    Cédric Colas, Laetitia Teodorescu, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Augmenting autotelic
agents with large language models, p.1


                                                         10
2.5    Self-Evolving Software Agent
Using the background information presented in this chapter, we can come up with a comprehensive
definition of the agent developed in this thesis. The software agent proposed, based on the Belief-
Desire-Intention (BDI) architecture, is autonomous, mobile, deliberative, and intelligent. The agent is
designed to operate in a virtual environment, using a Large Language Model (LLM) to autonomously
set and achieve evolving goals. The agent accomplishes a form of automated software evolution, where
changes are driven by interactions with the environment and realized through the generation of new
executable code. This automated process eliminates the need for external human intervention in the
phases of code generation, validation, and deployment. The agent’s ability to adapt, create reusable
code, and maintain its abilities over time highlights its alignment with Lehman’s E-type programs,
while giving a new perspective on software evolution through continuous, autonomous adaptation.




                                                  11
3         Architecture
The architecture developed is based on the BDI agent model, adapted in order to be used in unison
with an LLM to allow the agent to evolve. The architecture is divided into two main parts: the
perception unit and the control unit. The perception unit receives, handles, and processes events
coming from the environment, and stores the information that will be used by the control unit. The
control unit is responsible for the decision-making process, which consists of creating goals and trying
to achieve them by generating plans and executing them. From the input handled by the perception
unit, to the output actions executed by the control unit, the agent requires an external entity to
achieve its goals.
    In the context of this thesis, this external entity is ChatGPT, a Large Language Model (LLM)
capable of generating the natural language descriptions of the objectives to achieve, and the code
necessary to achieve them. Altough it is possible to replace the LLM, which does not necessarily
have to be ChatGPT, with some other entity with similar reasoning and generation capabilities, the
architecture is specifically designed to work with an LLM.
    The union of the BDI model, the LLM, and the architecture developed, consitute the self-evolving
software agent proposed in this thesis. This agent is capable of learning how to achieve self-proposed
objectives, given a description of the actions it can perform. Most importantly, this agent is environment-
agnostic, as long as the changes happening in the environment are modeled as events that can be
perceived by the agent.
    Let’s consider a BDI agent model pseudo-code specification [33], already presented in Section 2.3,
also shown here in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 Standard BDI agent model pseudocode
 1: B ← {β1 , ..., β2 }                                                 ▷ Initial beliefs-knowledge base
 2: I ← {ι1 , ..., ι2 }                                                       ▷ Initial intentions-desires
 3: while True do
 4:    get ρ                                                                                     ▷ Input
 5:    B ← belief sRevision(B, ρ)
 6:    D ← options(B, I)
 7:    I ← f ilter(B, D, I)                                                         ▷ Derived intentions
 8:    π ← plan(B, I)
 9:    while not [or empty(π)
10:               or succeded(I, B)
11:               or impossible(I, B)] do
12:       α ← head(π)
13:       return α
14:       π ← tail(π)                                                                         ▷ Output
15:       get ρ                                                                           ▷ Update of ρ
16:       B ← belief sRevision(B, ρ)
17:       if reconsider(I, B) then                                                  ▷ Caution condition
18:           D ← options(B, I)
19:           I ← f ilter(B, D, I)
20:       end if
21:       if not sound(π, I, B) then                                                      ▷ Plan update
22:           π ← plan(B, I)
23:       end if
24:    end while
25: end while


                                                   12
    The three main components, identified by the model name itself, are the Beliefs set, the Desires
set, and the Intentions set. The beliefs set contains propositions that the agent believes to be true,
describing the state of the world the agent operates in. The desires set consists of high-level goals
the agent would like to achieve, not directly actionable and possibly not consistent. The intentions
set is a more focused subset of refined desires, actionable, and directly guiding the agent closer to
achievement of its objectives.

    In the architecture developed, the concept of desires has been interpreted as long-term goals,
while intentions are seen as short-term goals that the agent is capable of achieving in few steps.
This interpretation is also reflected in the prompts given to the LLM, where the terms ’desire’ and
’intention’ were replaced with ’long-term goal’ and ’short-term goal’ respectively. This choice was
made to make the difference more clear to the LLM and help it produce correct responses. Instead,
the concept of belief set is kept the same, and the term ’belief set’ is used in all prompts. A similarity
with the BDI model presented in section 2.3 is that intentions can be seen as synonym to plans, and
are used to achieve the goals set by the desires.

   A major difference with the standard BDI agent model is that the two separated units, perception
and control, operate in an asynchronous way, allowing the agent to execute actions while still perceiving
the environment. This makes the beliefs revision step effectively continuous, updating the internal
agent’s representation of the environment as soon as a new event is received without waiting for the
current plan or action to be completed.

    Another important difference with the standard BDI agent model lays in how plans are executed:
in Algorithm 3, the plan, made of a sequence of actions, is first generated using an intention and
the current belief set, and only then is executed by the agent. Moreover, during execution, there are
multiple checks to see if the plan is still valid or if it should be updated or if its execution should
be interrupted. In the architecture developed, this is not possible due to implementation choices.
Each intention is carried out using its associated function that, given the belief set, generates the
next action to be executed. Once an action is chosen for execution, it is immediately performed by
the agent. This implementation allows the intention’s function to perform checks on the belief set,
which is asynchronously updated as the agent interacts with the environment, thus making the agent
reactive to changes. This means that the possibility of reconsidering a plan is not directly present in
the architecture developed, but can be indirectly realized in the functions that choose the next action
to perform.


3.1     Perception Unit
To explain how the perception unit works, we first need to define what events are, and what assump-
tions were made about them. An event occurs whenever there is a change in the environment that the
agent can perceive. If an event happens, the agent receives the percept of the event and with it some
information regarding the change. An assumption made is that the agent expects to receive, along
with the percept, the object type the event is related to, and also the type of change that happened,
which states if the object was added to the environment, changed in some way, or removed from the
environment.

    The object type needs to be specified in all events to allow the architecture to decide how to handle
the event and update the belief set. The event type is instead used to help the LLM understand what
kind of event is being received, and to simplify the generation of the perception functions.

    The Perception Functions set P F is one of the new components introduced in the architecture. It
is a set of functions that integrate the information contained in newly received events into the belief
set, performing the beliefs revision. Each object type that the agent has seen in the environment has
a corresponding perception function, which is used to process only the events related to that object
type. The perception functions are generated by the LLM and stored in the P F set, and are used to
update the belief set whenever a new event is received, as shown in Algorithm 4.

                                                   13
Algorithm 4 Perception module pseudocode
 1: B ← {}                                                                            ▷ Initialize Belief Set
 2: P F ← {}                                                             ▷ Initialize Perception Functions
 3: while T rue do
 4:    E ← getN ewEvents()
 5:    P F ← generateP erceptionF unctions(P F, E)                                  ▷ Prompt LLM (1)(2)
 6:    B ← reviseBelief Set(B, P F, E)
 7: end while



    The belief set B and the perception functions set P F are initialized as empty, the agent then
enters an infinite loop in which new events are received, new functions are generated by the LLM
when necessary, and the belief set is updated using those functions. Perception functions generated
in previous iterations are stored and reused for events related to the same object type. It is possible
to set a limit on the number of events that a function can process before being discarded, otherwise
the function will be used indefinitely. If an error occurs when processing an event, the function for
that object type is marked as invalid and a new function will be generated to replace it.


3.2       Control Unit
The control unit is very different from the standard BDI agent model, with many more components
to adapt the architecture to use it in conjunction with an LLM, and to allow the agent to evolve
in the goals it can achieve. As explained before, desires and intentions are interpreted as long-term
and short-term goals respectively. The purpose of the control unit is to populate these two sets, thus
acquiring new abilities and evolving over time, while interacting with the environment trough action
execution. The main components of the control unit are:

      • Intentions I: The Intentions set contains all the intentions generated. Each intention consists
        of a textual description and a code function. The description explains what is the goal the
        intention is trying to achieve, and the function is used to generate the plan to achieve that goal.

      • Desires D: The Desires set contains all the desires generated. Each desire consists of a textual
        description, a list of intentions, and a trigger function. The description explains what is the
        long-term goal that the desire is trying to achieve. The list of intentions is the set of short-
        term goals that, if achieved sequencially by executing the plan generated by each associated
        fucntion, should lead to the satisfaction of the desire. The trigger function is used to check if
        the environment is in a state in which the desire can and should be pursued.

      • Desire Trigger Functions DT F : This set contains all the desire trigger functions generated.
        Each trigger function is associated to a single desire from the desires set. The function takes the
        belief set as input, and returns a boolean value that indicates if the desire should be pursued or
        not given the current state of the environment.

      • Actions A: This set contains the actions that the agent can perform. Each action is provided
        with a brief description of what effect it has. All actions are first transformed into an intention
        and then added to the Intentions set.

      • Memory M : The Memory component is uniquely used as a feedback mechanism to help the
        LLM generate working intentions, and is erased after each generation. In this implementation
        the memory is a string that contains some text generated by the LLM in the previous iteration.

      The control loop is described in Algorithm 5.

                                                      14
Algorithm 5 Control unit pseudocode
 1: D ← {}                                                                              ▷ Initialize Desires
 2: DT F ← {}                                                      ▷ Initialize Desires Trigger Functions
 3: I ← {}                                                                 ▷ Initialize Intentions Library
 4: P ←Ø                                                                           ▷ Initialize empty Plan
 5: A ← {moveup, pickup, ...}                                                ▷ Initialize and load Actions
 6: M ←Ø                                                                       ▷ Initialize empty Memory
 7: I ← addActionsAsIntentions(A, I)                                       ▷ Populate Intentions Library
 8: wait()                                                             ▷ Wait for Belief Set to be ready
 9: while T rue do
10:    D′ ← checkDesiresT riggers(D, DT F )
11:    if D′ then
12:        P ← getP lan(D′ , B)
13:        E ← execute(P )
14:        if ¬desireIsSatisf ied(D′ , B) then                                        ▷ Prompt LLM (5)
15:            D ← removeDesire(D, D′ )
16:        end if
17:    end if
18:    if ¬D′ then
19:        M ← eraseM emory()
20:        D′ ← generateN ewDesire(D, B)                                              ▷ Prompt LLM (1)
21:        while T rue do
22:            I ′ ← generateIntention(D′ , I, B, M )                              ▷ Prompt LLM (2)(3)
23:            P ← getP lan(I ′ , B)
24:            E = execute(P )
25:            evaluation, M ′ ← evaluateExecution(I ′ , P, E, M )                 ▷ Prompt LLM (4)(7)
26:            M ← updateM emory(M ′ )
27:            if evaluation then
28:                M ← eraseM emory()
29:                D′ ← addIntentionT oDesire(I ′ )
30:                if desireIsSatisf ied(D′ , B) then                                 ▷ Prompt LLM (5)
31:                    DT F ′ = generateT riggerF unction(D′ , B)                     ▷ Prompt LLM (6)
32:                    D = addDesire(D′ )
33:                    DT F = addT riggerF unction(DT F ′ )
34:                    break
35:                end if
36:            end if
37:        end while
38:    end if
39: end while


    The objective of the control unti is to populate the desires and intentions set with new goals that
the agent can achieve by executing the associated functions. The evolution aspect lays in this process
of generating new goals, trying to achieve them, and evaluating the results. At the end of the process,
the agent can avail of these learned abilities without needing to consult with the LLM.
    The control unit, shown in Algorithm 5, consists of the following steps:
      • All sets and components are initialized as empty.
      • The actions available to the agent are transformed into intentions and added to the intentions
        set. Each action is paired with a function that, in this implementation, is a simple wrapper
        around the action itself. Alongside the function, a short textual description explaining what the
        action does is also added to the intention for each action.
      • When all components are ready, the agent needs to wait for the belief set to contain at least one

                                                    15
      entry before starting the desire and intentions generation process. Once the belief set is ready,
      the agent waits once more for a predefined amount of time, after that the control loop starts.

   • First the agent checks if any of its desires can be pursued. In this checking phase, the trigger
     functions associated with each desire are run with the current belief set as input. If any of
     the functions returns a positive result, the corresponding desire is selected as a candidate for
     execution. If more than one candidates are found, the desire to be pursued is chosen randomly
     and is triggered in this way. In the first iteration of the loop, the desires set will be empty,
     meaning that this step is initially skipped.

   • If a desire is triggered, all the valid intentions associated with it are executed in sequence. After
     the execution is completed, the LLM is prompted to evaluate whether the long-term goal was
     achieved or not. If the LLM determines that the desire was not satisfied, the desire is invalidated
     and can no longer be triggered in future iterations. The desire is also invalidated if the execution
     of one of its intentions fails. In this case the intention will be invalidated as well.

   • If no desire is triggered, the agent proceeds to generate a new desire. The LLM is prompted
     with the current belief set and the list of all desires’ descriptions, and is asked to generate a new
     desire.

   • Once a desire is generated, the agent enters a loop that will terminate if the currently pursued
     desire is satisfied, or if too many intentions fail to generate in a row. In this loop, the LLM
     generates a new intention aligned with the desire goal description, and the agent tries to execute
     it. If the functions fails to execute, the intention is invalidated and a new one is generated. If the
     intention is instead executed successfully, the LLM is asked to determine if the short-term goal
     from the intention description was accomplished. A negative evaluation is accompanied by some
     feedback that is stored in the memory and is given to the LLM in the next intention generation.

   • However, if the LLM evaluates positively the intention execution, the intention is added to the
     desire, and the LLM is asked to evaluate whether the desire is satisfied or not. If the desire
     is not satisfied, the loop continues with new intention generations until the desire is judged as
     satisfied or until too many intentions fail to generate in a row.

   • If the desire is evaluated as satisfied, the LLM is prompted to generate a trigger function for
     the desire. This function will be used in the next iterations to determined if the desire can be
     triggered. The desire is then added to the desires set with the associated trigger function and
     intentions list. If the trigger function does not generate correctly, the desire is still added to the
     set, but is invalidated making it impossible to trigger in future iterations.
   If this process is successful, after a number of iterations of the control loop, the agent will be
able to achieve a number of long-term goals, defined in the desires set, through the execution of the
short-term goals, defined in the intentions set. The agent will also have knowledge of when a long-term
goal can be pursued thanks to the trigger function associated to each desire.

3.3     Implementation Details
This section contains an explanation of the most important details of the implementation of the
architecture. The architecture is fully written in Python with a multi-threaded approach to allow for
the perception and control units, and their many sub-modules, to run concurrently.
3.3.1    BDI Components
This section will explain how the elements of the BDI model are implemented, specifically the belief
set, the desires set, the intentions set, and the perception functions set. For each element, an example
will be provided to clarify its purpose in the architecture.
    The belief set is simply a dictionary in which information is stored as the LLM decides to. The
belief set is initialized as:
      belief_set = {}

                                                   16
An example of the value of the belief set, once updated, is the following:

{
    map: {
              ’width’: 2,
              ’height’: 2,
              ’grid’: [{’cell_coordinates’: [0, 0], ’cell_type’: ’parcels_spawn’},
                       {’cell_coordinates’: [0, 1], ’cell_type’: ’walkable’},
                       {’cell_coordinates’: [1, 0], ’cell_type’: ’walkable’},
                       {’cell_coordinates’: [1, 1], ’cell_type’: ’delivery_cell’}]
         },
    parcels: {1: {’id’: 7, ’coordinates’: [0, 0], ’score’: 20, ’carried_by_id’: 1}},
    agent: {’id’: 1, ’coordinates’: [0, 1], ’parcels_carried_ids’: [1], ’score’: 0},
    keys: {1: {’id’: 2, ’coordinates’: [0, 1], ’carried_by_id’: None}}
}

    The belief set is updated by the perception functions that take as arguments the belief set and
the last event received. Each event is related to a specific object type, which is used to select which
perception function to use. Events are modeled in a JSON format, and an example of an event is the
following:

{
    "event_type": "object changed",
    "object_type": "parcel",
    "object": {"id": 21, "coordinates": [0, 0], "score": 20, "carried_by_id": 1}
}

All events are modeled with the same three fields: event type, object type, and object. The event type
can contain one of the three following values: ”object added”, ”object changed” or ”object removed”.
The object type is used to select the correct perception function that handles only events related to
that specific object type. Once the event is handled, and its information has been integrated into the
belief set, the event is discarded and the next received event is processed.
    The perception functions generated by the LLM are stored in a dictionary, where the key is the
object type the function is responsible of processing. If a perception function runs into an error while
processing an event, the function is discarded and a new one is generated. An example of a perception
function, that handles events related to the agent object type, is the following:

def function_3(event, belief_set):
    if event[’object_type’] == ’agent’:
        if event[’event_type’] == ’object added’:
            belief_set[’agent’] = event[’object’]
        elif event[’event_type’] == ’object changed’:
            belief_set[’agent’].update(event[’object’])
        elif event[’event_type’] == ’object removed’:
            belief_set.pop(’agent’, None)
    return belief_set

    The belief set is used by intentions and desires to generate plans that the agent will then execute.
Desires are complex objects that are composed of multiple intentions, and thus require more than one
LLM generation step to be fully created. Intentions are simpler, and are generated with one single
prompt. Each intention consists of a goal description sand a function. The function can contain calls
to other intentions that were generated without errors in previous iterations of the control loop. When
calling another intention, the intention associated with the called function is executed. An example
of an intention is the following:

                                                  17
Executable: True
Description: The short term goal of the agent is to move towards the delivery
    cell while carrying a parcel, check if it’s at the delivery cell, and if it
    is, deliver the parcel.
Funciton:
        def function_9():
            global belief_set
            agent = belief_set[’agent’]
            delivery_cell = [cell for cell in belief_set[’map’][’grid’] if cell[
                ’cell_type’] == ’delivery_cell’][0][’cell_coordinates’]
            while agent[’coordinates’] != delivery_cell:
                if agent[’coordinates’][0] < delivery_cell[0]:
                    function_2()
                    agent[’coordinates’][0] += 1
                elif agent[’coordinates’][0] > delivery_cell[0]:
                    function_1()
                    agent[’coordinates’][0] -= 1
                elif agent[’coordinates’][1] < delivery_cell[1]:
                    function_4()
                    agent[’coordinates’][1] += 1
                elif agent[’coordinates’][1] > delivery_cell[1]:
                    function_3()
                    agent[’coordinates’][1] -= 1
            function_6()
This intention contains calls to the functions function 1, function 2, function 3, function 4, and func-
tion 6. These particular functions are the ones that allow the agent to perform the basic actions of
moving, picking up objects, and putting them down. These functions are added at the start of the
control loop, and are based on the actions that the agent is able to perform. For this reason, the
functions associated to the basic actions can never be invalidated, and they are always available to
be called by any intention. An attribute that is saved with each intention is the Executable attribute:
intentions that are successfully generated are marked as valid and their Executable attribute is set to
True. Only executable intentions can be included in future intention generations.
    Desires are generated in multiple steps: first the goal description is proposed by the LLM, and
only then a number of intentions are generated, as explained above, to try and achieve this goal. The
intentions generated are asked to be aligned with the desire goal description, and only when the LLM
evaluates that the desire is satisfied, step which is done after the execution of each intention successfully
created, the trigger function is generated. After this process the desire is added to the desires set and
no further modifications are made to it. The trigger function is used in future iterations of the control
loop to check if the desire can be executed. When a desire is triggered, the intentions that are part of it
are executed in sequence in order to achieve once again the goal of the desire. Similarly to intentions,
a desire that is valid is said to be executable, and only executable desire can be triggered in future
iterations. For clarity, desires that are executable will be referred to as triggerable in following sections
and chapters. In the following desire example the intentions are omitted for brevity:
     Description: The agent’s long term goal is to efficiently navigate
     through the environment, collect as many parcels as possible from the
     spawn area, and deliver them to the delivery cell to maximize the
     overall score.
     Executable: True
     Intentions: [
         ...
     ]
     Trigger function:
         def function_dtf_1(belief_set):

                                                     18
               if belief_set[’parcel’] and any(cell[’cell_type’] == ’parcels_spawn’ for
                   cell in belief_set[’map’][’grid’]):
                   return True
               else:
                   return False

3.3.2    Desire Outcomes during Generation and Triggering
It is possible to idenfity two phases in the main loop of the control unit, shown in Algorithm 5 in
section 3.2. The first phase, that will be referred to as the Desire Generation Phase, is described in
lines 19-37 of the algorithm, while the second phase, the Desire Triggering Phase, is described in lines
10-17. During these two phases, the desires generated go through a series of steps that validate them.
Depending on the outcome of these steps, it is possible to divide desires into different categories. To
visualize the process that desires go through and what are the possible outcomes, two diagrams are
shown in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2.
    After generation, all desires are added to the Desires Set but, depending on how successful their
generation was, four total categories can be identified. If the intentions associated to the desire, as part
of the desire generation, reach the desire goal, the desire was Satisfied. If the intentions fail to reach
the goal, which happens after 3 failed intention generations in a row, the desire was Not Satisfied.
Only for the desires considered as Satisfied the trigger function is generated. If the LLM is not
able to generate correctly the trigger function, then the desire will not have the opportunity of being
triggered during the Desire Triggering Phase. For this reason, desires can be further categorized as
Triggerable, meaning desires that were satisfied and whose trigger function was generated correctly,
and Not Triggerable, meaning desires that were satisfied but whose trigger function generation
failed. Figure 3.1 shows how each category is reached during the generation process.
    During the Desire Triggering Phase, all trigger functions associated to triggerable desires are run
with the current belief set as argument. If a trigger function gives as output a positive result then its
associated desire is triggered and is immediately executed. After the execution of a triggered desire,
the LLM is prompted to evaluate if the desire was once again satisfied or not. If the LLM decides that
the desire goal was not achieved during the triggered execution, the desire is invalidated and will no
longer be triggerable in future desire triggering phases. This category of desires can be classified as
Not Triggerable. Instead, if the LLM evaluates the desire triggered execution as successful, meaning
that the goal of the desire was reached, then the desire remains in the Triggerable state. Figure 3.2
shows how each category is reached during the triggering process.
    At the end of the control loop, the agent will have generated a set of desires that belong to one
of the four categories described above. However, further distintions can be made, depending on if
a desire was ever triggered during the entire process. Desires that after the generation phase were
classified as Triggerable, but never actually executed during the triggering phase, can be classified
as Untriggered. Desires that were instead triggered at least once during the triggering phase can be
classified as Triggered.
    A Triggered and Triggerable desire is much more valuable than an Untriggered and Trigger-
able one, since the former has been tested and proven to work oustide the generation phase, meaning
that it executed in a different state of the environment than the one it was generated in. The latter,
instead, has only been tested in the state of the environment in which it was generated, and there is
no guarantee that it will function correctly in a different state.
3.3.3    Intention Outcomes during Generation and Triggering
It is possible to identify a couple of categories for intentions as well, depending on the outcome of the
execution and evaluation steps they go through during the Desire Generation Phase and the Desire
Triggering Phase, defined in the previous section.
     Let’s first clarify when an intention is generated, what is its purpose, and how it is used. All
intentions are created during the Desire Generation Phase, and their objective is to achieve the long-
term goal, or a part of it, described in the desire goal description. Each intention is associated with a
function that, when executed, makes the agent execute actions that should bring it closer to the final
goal. As shown in Figure 3.3, during their generation, all intentions can be classified as Generated

                                                    19
Figure 3.1: Possible desire outcomes during the Generation Phase.




                               20
Figure 3.2: Possible desire outcomes during the Triggering Phase.




                               21
Correctly or Not Generated Correctly. Intentions that were not generated correctly either en-
countered an error during their execution or were evaluated negatively by the LLM, in both cases it
means that the intention did not reach the goal it was created for. If an intention is generated correctly,
it is said to be Executable. Only executable intentions can be called by the functions associated to
the intentions that will be generated in the next iterations of the control loop. Furthermore, when a
desire is triggered during the Desire Triggering Phase, only the executable intentions that belong to
that desire will be executed. However, an executable desire can still be invalidated if, at any point of
the control loop, the execution of the intention fails, and in that case it will no longer be Executable.
3.3.4    Prompting the LLM
The architecture involves prompting the LLM multiple times to obtain goal descriptions, functions
and evaluations, based on the data included in the prompt. Algorithm 5 and Algorithm 4 in Section
3.2 show where the agent makes requests to the LLM. Prompts have been numbered to identify the
different types of requests made. For each prompt, an explanation of the data provided to the LLM
and the purpose of the prompt is given.
    The LLM used in this implementation is ChatGPT with model name GPT-4. All requests to this
LLM are made with two elements composing the prompt: the context and the question. The context
is used to give instructions to the LLM about what it is expected to generate, and is used to influence
the response. For all prompts, the context is the same. The question contains the actual request and
differs for each prompt. The templates used can be found at:
https://github.com/francesco-vaccari/Deliveroo2/tree/main/agent_dir/prompts.

   The prompts made in the perception unit are the following:

   • Perception Prompt 1: The LLM is asked to generate a perception function capable of handling
     the events of an object type observed in the environment. A number of example events are
     provided along with the current belief set, which is initially empty. The expected response is a
     python function that will be used to update the belief set in the beliefs revision step.

   • Perception Prompt 2: If an error occurs while processing an event, the LLM is prompted to
     fix the perception function that encountered the error. The erroring event is also provided to
     the LLM to help it understand what went wrong. The expected response is a python function
     that handles events of a specific object type.

   The prompts made in the control unit are the following:

   • Control Prompt (1): Given the information contained in the currente belief set, and the list
     of long-term goals achieved so far, the LLM is asked to come up with a new long-term goal
     description that will be part of the new desire generated. As desires are generated successfully,
     the list of long-term goals, which is initially empty, is populated with the implemented desire
     goal descriptions.

   • Control Prompt (2): This prompt is available in four different variants, slightly different in
     the elemnts that are provided to the LLM, depending on the configuration of the architecture
     and on the phase of the control loop. The desire goal description, the current belief set, and
     the library of the intentions generated so far are provided in all variants. The LLM is asked
     to generate a new intention with a short-term goal aligned with the long-term goal description
     given. The intentions library is provided to allow the LLM to include calls to the base actions
     and to other intentions generated previously by the LLM itself. Each intention in the library is
     associated with its goal description to provide information on what the intention does. If the
     architecture is configured to generate intentions in a stateless way, the library of intentions only
     includes the base actions. The additional memory component is also provided in the prompt if
     the last intention generation failed, which means that the feedback mechanism was activated.
     The expected response is a new intention, which consists of a textual description and a python
     function.

                                                    22
Figure 3.3: Possible intention outcomes during their generation.




                              23
    • Control Prompt (3): If an error occurs while validating the intention just generated, the agent
      makes an attempt at fixing the mistake by prompting the LLM with the function and the error
      that occured. All other components provided in this prompt are the same of Prompt 2.

    • Control Prompt (4): After the intention is executed, and the execution terminates without
      errors, the LLM evaluates if the agent reached the short-term goal depicted in the intention goal
      description. To do so, the prompt includes the goal description, a copy of the belief set before
      the execution of the plan, the current belief set, and the list of actions performed, each with
      the associated events received. The two belief sets alone should be enough to spot what are the
      differences in the environment, and so to determine if the goal was reached or not. The list of
      actions performed are included to give the LLM a better understanding of all the steps the agent
      went through. Each action is associated with the events received shortly after it was performed
      so that it is clear what effect the action had. Moreover, the LLM is instructed to suggest how
      to improve or fix mistakes if it evaluates that the intention goal was not achieved. The expected
      response includes a boolean value and, in the case of a negative evaluation, the feedback on what
      went wrong. This feedback is then stored in the memory component.

    • Control Prompt (7): If during the intention execution an error occurs, the LLM is prompted
      with the error and the function that caused it. The LLM is also provided the belief set before
      the plan was executed, the actions that were performed before the error happened, the events
      received associated with each action, and the current belief set. This prompt has a similar
      purpose of Prompt 4, without the need of evaluation since the intention failed to execute. The
      expected response is the feedback that will be then stored in memory for the next intention
      generation.

    • Control Prompt (5): When an intention is positively evaluated by the LLM, the desire
      is evaluated as well to determine if the long-term goal was reached. To make this decision,
      the prompt includes the desire goal description, a copy of the belief set before the desire was
      pursued, and the current belief set. Just like when evaluating intentions, the expected response
      is a boolean value.

    • Control Prompt (6): If the desire is evaluated positively, the LLM tries to generate the
      trigger function. The prompt provides the desire goal description and two different instances
      of the belief set: one before the desire was originally pursued, and the current belief set. The
      expected response is a python function that has to return a boolean value, and this value has to
      be True when given the first belief set as input.

   To facilitate parsing, the LLM is instructed to provide its responses in a JSON format, including
only the fields requested, with no further comments, explanations, or additional information.
3.3.5    About the environment-agnosticism of the agent
As stated before, the architecture is environment-agnostic, but some adjustments must be made before
running the agent. These adjustments involve the definition of the base actions that the agent can
perform, and how the environment is perceived through the events received.
    The environment is implemented as a server to which the agent connects as a client. To com-
municate, a simple protocol was defined in order to allow the environment to send the events to the
agent, and to allow the agent to send back the actions that will be executed in the environment. The
actions are defined in a configuration file that contains, for each action, a brief description and the
action name that is recognized by the environment. When the agent is started, the base actions are
loaded from the configuration file and for each one an intention is created containing the description
defined in the file and the function that sends the action name to the environment. An example of
how actions are defined is the following:

{
     "function_name": "action_1",
     "description": "This is a wrapper function for action_1. The agent moves by 1

                                                  24
                     cell, decreasing its first coordinate by 1.",
     "action_name": "action_1"
}

     When the environment changes, an event related to what happened is sent to the agent. The event
has to contain two fields: event type and object type. The event type must contain one of the following
values: ”object added”, ”object changed”, or ”object removed”. It would be possible to remove the
event type field and let the LLM create functions that infer this information given the belief set, but
it is simpler and less error-prone to have the environment send this information directly, altough it
might not be possible depending on the application. The object type is instead used directly by the
architecture to select the correct perception function to use, and not including this field would require
a modification of the architecture. If the structure of events were to be modified, the prompts made to
the LLM would have to be adjusted accordingly to be consistent with the new structure. An example
of an event is the following:

{
     "event_type": "object changed",
     "object_type": "key",
     "object": {"id": 1, "coordinates": [2, 2], "carried_by_id": 1}
}

3.3.6    Architecture Configurations
The architecture developed can be run with different starting configurations. These options can
influence both the perception and control units, and change the way the agent behaves.

    • Perception Generation Only On Error: If this option is enabled, the perception functions
      in the perception unit are generated only when an error occurs while processing an incoming
      event. Alternatively, perception functions are replaced after a certain period of time, and the
      interval that passes between one generation and the next is increased as time goes on. By default,
      this option is disabled, but all experiments that were run and that will be explained in the next
      chapter have this option enabled as it greatly reduces the cost of prompting the LLM, and it is
      not necessary with the environment used.

    • Stateless Intention Generation: When the LLM generates a new intention, it is given the
      possibility of calling other previously generated intention functions. If this option is enabled,
      the LLM can only include calls to the base action that the agent can perform, thus making the
      LLM unaware of previous intentions. By default this option is disabled.

    • User Generated Desire: During the generation of desires, the LLM is responsible for proposing
      the goal description of the deisire. With this option enabled, it is the user that provides this
      goal description, and the LLM in only responsible of the generation of the intentions that should
      achieve the user-proposed goal. By default this option is disabled, but might be very relevant in
      the context of AI assistants where the user describes with natural language what they want to
      make happen in the environment.

    • No Desire Triggering: With this is option enabled, the desire triggering phase is skipped
      altogether, which means that all desires that are potentially triggerable are never triggered and
      executed. By default this option is disabled.

    • No Evaluation of Triggered Desires: After a desire is triggered and executed the LLM has
      to evaluate if the desire goal was actually reached to verify that the desire is working correctly.
      If this option is enabled, this evaluation step is skipped and all desires, once they pass the
      generation phase, are assumed to be always correct. By avoiding this evaluation step, the LLM
      is prompted less, reducing the cost of running the agent, but if any of the desires are not working
      correctly, the agent will not be able to detect it. By default this option is disabled.

                                                   25
4        Experiments
This chapter presents the experiments conducted to evaluate the proposed architecture. First, the
environment and the elements that compose it are described. Then, the typologies of experiments and
their purpose are explained, as well as the methodology used to run and evaluate the experiments.
Finally, the results are going to be showed with a detailed analysis of various aspects of the generated
desires and intentions.

4.1     Environment
The virtual environment consists of a two-dimensional grid map made of cells. Each cell can contain
the objects that the agent interacts with. Let us first describe what are the actions that the agent can
perform:

    • Move (Up, Down, Left, Right): The agent has the ability to move around the map. With
      each movement action, the agent makes one step in the adjacent cell in the direction specified.

    • Pick Up: The agent can pick up certain objects from the ground, as long as they are in the
      same cell as the agent. Once picked up, the object coordinates will change as the agent moves
      on the map. The pick-up action can be performed on multiple objects at the same time.

    • Put Down: The agent can put down the objects it is carrying. The objects, once put down,
      will be located in the same cell as the agent. The put down action drops all the objects that are
      being carried by the agent.

The pick-up and put-down actions are not specific to any object, meaning that the agent does not
need to know or express what object it is executing the action on. If the agent tries to perform an
action that is not allowed in the current environment, it will simply be ignored. For example, trying
to move into a non-existent cell will cause the agent to remain in the same position.
    The elements that the agent can interact with are the following:

    • Parcel: All parcels have a score associated with them. Parcels can be picked and put down in
      any cell. If the agent puts down a parcel in a delivery cell, the parcel’s score is added to the
      agent’s total score.

    • Battery: When picked up, batteries are immediately consumed and increase the agent’s energy.

    • Key: Keys are objects that can be picked up and put down in any cell. If an agent is holding a
      key, it can move through doors. Keys can open all doors and are not consumed when picked up.

    • Door: Doors cannot be picked up or put down by the agent. Their objective is to block the
      agent’s path. If a cell contains a door, the agent will need to hold a key to move through it.

Depending on which of these elements are configured to spawn, the agent will have different attributes:
a score to keep track of the accumulated points that are obtained by delivering parcels, an energy
value that goes down with each action performed, and a key attribute that indicates whether the agent
is holding a key.
    Each cell that composes the grid of the map is of one of the following types:

    • Walkable: This is the default cell type. The agent can move on these cells.

    • Non-Walkable: The agent cannot move on non-walkable cells. These cells are used to represent
      walls.

                                                  26
   • Delivery: These cells can be walked on by the agent. If the agent puts down some parcels in a
     delivery cell, the agent’s score is increased by the sum of the scores of the parcels delivered.

   • Double Delivery: This cell type is the same as the delivery cell, except that the agent receives
     double the score it would receive in a normal delivery cell.

   • Parcel Spawn: In this type of cell parcels are spawned.

   • Battery Spawn: In this type of cell batteries are spawned.

The spawning types of cells are not strictly necessary since the agent can infer the position of parcels
and batteries from the objects directly. However, the presence of these cells enables the agent to plan
in a predictive way, for example by moving to a parcel spawn cell to pick up parcels that do not yet
exist on the map. Furthermore, redundance of information can help the LLM produce more consistent
results.
    For the user that spectates an experiment, the environment is displayed as shown in Figure 4.1.




                                       Figure 4.1: Environment


4.2    Methodology
A total of 24 experiments were conducted, 3 for each of the 8 typologies designed. Experiments that
belong to the same typology start with the same initial state of the environment. The initial state is
defined in the configuration of the typology, which is different for each one. Typologies can be divided
into two categories:

   • Typologies 1 to 4: The agent does not have the ability to trigger desires, meaning that once
     a desire is generated correctly, it is never executed again. The purpose of these typologies is to
     test whether the agent can at least move on the map and complete meaningful objectives. As
     explained in Section 3.3.6, this is done by disabling the desires triggering phase.

   • Typologies 5 to 8: The agent has the ability to trigger desires, which means that once a
     desire is generated correctly, it can be triggered and executed in future iterations of the control
     loop during the desire triggering phase. The purpose of these typologies is not only to test
     whether the agent can reach the objectives set for the experiments, but also to test if it is able
     to continuously reach its goals by triggering the desires implemented without needing the LLM
     to generate new ones.

Within each category, as the number of the typology increases, experiments designed become more
complex. The complexity of the experiments is increased by adding more elements to the environment,
such as batteries, keys, and doors.

                                                  27
    All experiments have a total of 4 desire generation attempts before they are stopped. In typologies
1 to 4, the experiment is also stopped as soon as the agent reaches the objective of delivering one
parcel. In contrast, in typologies 5 to 8, experiments are always carried out until the limit of 4 desires
is reached, regardless of the number of parcels delivered.
    Experiments of typology 8 are different than all others since they are divided into 6 steps, each
with a different configuration of cells and objects. The purpose of this typology is to introduce the
agent in the first 5 steps to the objects and cells it can interact with, and then test if, using the learned
desires, it can complete step 6 without prompting the LLM.


4.3     Results
We are first going to consider the evolution of the agent, the objectives it reached and the abilities it
learned. Then, we are going to analyse the desires and intentions generated by the LLM, considering
both quantitative and qualitative aspects.

4.3.1    Results of the Evolution Process
To evaluate whether the agent’s evolution is successful, it is possible to define a number of practical
objectives that the agent is expected to reach in the experiments. The objectives identified are different
for each typology, as they depend on which elements are present in the environment. The objectives
defined, and whether the agent was capable of reaching them, are shown in tables 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5,
4.6, 4.7 and 4.8. In typologies 3 and 4, it is reported in parentheses the type of delivery cell in which
the parcels were delivered: 1x means the normal delivery cell, 2x means the double-points delivery
cell. In typologies 5, 6 and 7, the number reported for the ’deliver a parcel’ objective indicates the
number of deliveries performed, while the number in parentheses indicates the total number of parcels
delivered. For clarity, a delivery is defined as the agent picking up one or more parcels, moving to the
delivery cell, and putting down the parcels. This journey, regardless of the number of parcels picked
up, is considered as one delivery.


          Objective                       Experiment 1        Experiment 2        Experiment 3
          move on the map                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          move to a parcel spawn cell         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          pick up a parcel                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          move to a delivery cell             Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          deliver a parcel                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes

                      Table 4.1: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 1.




          Objective                       Experiment 1        Experiment 2        Experiment 3
          move on the map                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          move to a parcel spawn cell         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          pick up a parcel                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          move to a delivery cell             Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          deliver a parcel                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          move to key                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          pick up key                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes
          open the door                       Yes                 Yes                 Yes

                      Table 4.2: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 2.

                                                     28
         Objective                     Experiment 1      Experiment 2      Experiment 3
         move on the map                   Yes               Yes               Yes
         move to a parcel spawn cell       Yes               Yes               Yes
         pick up a parcel                  Yes               Yes               Yes
         move to a delivery cell           Yes               Yes               Yes
         deliver a parcel                Yes (2x)          Yes (2x)          Yes (1x)
         move to key                       Yes               Yes               Yes
         pick up key                       Yes               Yes               Yes
         open the door                     Yes               Yes                No

Table 4.3: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 3. The value in parentheses indicates the
type of delivery cell in which the parcel was delivered: 1x means the normal delivery cell, 2x means
the double-points delivery cell.


         Objective                     Experiment 1      Experiment 2      Experiment 3
         move on the map                   Yes               Yes               Yes
         move to a parcel spawn cell       Yes               Yes               Yes
         pick up a parcel                  Yes               Yes               Yes
         move to a delivery cell            No                No               Yes
         delivery a parcel                  No                No             Yes (2x)
         move to key                        No               Yes               Yes
         pick up key                        No                No               Yes
         open the door                      No                No               Yes

Table 4.4: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 4. The value in parentheses indicates the
type of delivery cell in which the parcel was delivered: 1x means the normal delivery cell, 2x means
the double-points delivery cell.


         Objective                     Experiment 1      Experiment 2      Experiment 3
         move on the map                   Yes               Yes               Yes
         move to a parcel spawn cell       Yes               Yes               Yes
         pick up a parcel                  Yes               Yes               Yes
         move to a delivery cell           Yes               Yes               Yes
         deliver a parcel                 4 (11)            6 (21)            4 (13)

Table 4.5: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 5. The value reported for the ’deliver a
parcel’ objective indicates the number of deliveries performed. The number in parentheses indicates
the total number of parcels delivered.


        Objective                      Experiment 1      Experiment 2      Experiment 3
        move on the map                     Yes              Yes               Yes
        move to a parcel spawn cell         Yes              Yes               Yes
        pick up a parcel                    Yes              Yes               Yes
        move to a delivery cell             Yes              Yes               Yes
        deliver a parcel                   2 (8)            9 (25)            5 (19)
        move to a battery spawn cell        Yes              Yes               Yes
        pick up battery                     No               Yes               Yes

Table 4.6: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 6. The value reported for the ’deliver a
parcel’ objective indicates the number of deliveries performed. The number in parentheses indicates
the total number of parcels delivered.

                                                29
        Objective                         Experiment 1    Experiment 2       Experiment 3
        move on the map                       Yes             Yes                Yes
        move to a parcel spawn cell           Yes             Yes                Yes
        pick up a parcel                      Yes             Yes                Yes
        move to a delivery cell               Yes             Yes                Yes
        deliver a parcel                     2 (11)          4 (20)             1 (10)
        move to a battery spawn cell          Yes             Yes                Yes
        pick up battery                       Yes             Yes                 No
        move to key                           Yes             Yes                Yes
        pick up key                           Yes             Yes                Yes
        open the door                         Yes             Yes                Yes

Table 4.7: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 7. The value reported for the ’deliver a
parcel’ objective indicates the number of deliveries performed. The number in parentheses indicates
the total number of parcels delivered.




      Objective                            Experiment 1      Experiment 2      Experiment 3
      complete step 1 (pick up parcel)         Yes               Yes               Yes
      complete step 2 (deliver parcel)         Yes               Yes               Yes
      complete step 3 (pick up battery)        Yes               Yes               Yes
      complete step 4 (pick up key)            Yes               Yes               Yes
      complete step 5 (open the door)          Yes               Yes                No
      move on the map                          Yes               Yes               Yes
      move to a parcel spawn cell              Yes               Yes               Yes
      pick up a parcel                         Yes               Yes               Yes
      move to a delivery cell                   No               Yes               Yes
      deliver a parcel                          No               Yes               Yes
      move to a battery spawn cell             Yes                No                No
      pick up battery                          Yes                No                No
      move to key                              Yes               Yes               Yes
      pick up key                              Yes               Yes               Yes
      open the door                             No               Yes               Yes

Table 4.8: Objectives reached in experiments of typology 8. The completions of first 5 steps are also
considered as objectives.



    Typology 8 experiments are structured in a different way. In all other experiments the environ-
ment map and elements are already present at the beginning of the run, and the agent immediately
knows what it can expect to find. In the worst case, more parcels or batteries will spawn during the
experiment, but at least one of the objects is already in its predefined position. Typology 8 involves
a dynamic environment where the types of cells that constitute the map and the elements that are
present change from step to step. The agent first goes through 5 steps to learn to perform various
tasks, which will then be tested in step 6 where all objects are present at the same time. However,
the agent still has the ability to prompt the LLM even in step 6. In fact, none of the objectives of
this last step were reached thanks to previously implemented desires, but only thanks to the LLM’s
intervention.
   As the tables show, the agent struggles the most in typologies 4 and 8 where it is not able to
perform a delivery in all experiments. Table 4.9 shows how, in the most complex experiments, the
agent did not always succeed in delivering parcels. Overall, the success rate of the agent is 87.5%.

                                                 30
                                      Typology      Success Rate
                                         1               1.0
                                         2               1.0
                                         3               1.0
                                         4              0.33
                                         5               1.0
                                         6               1.0
                                         7               1.0
                                         8              0.67

                                 Table 4.9: Success Rates by Typology

    Other than showing the objectives reached in the experiments, it is also important to evaluate
whether the agent, after reaching an objective, did really learn how to perform the task without
the need of the LLM. A learned ability is represented by a desire that was generated correctly and
reached its goal. However, we can only consider desires that were executed at least once after the
initial generation. This is because those desires proved to work in a state of the environment that
was different from the one in which they were generated; and since desires cannot be triggered in
typologies 1 to 4, we can only evaluate this aspect in typologies 5 to 8:

   • Typology 8: As already mentioned before, desires generated in the first five steps were not
     reused successfully in step 6. The only desire that was able to trigger and execute successfully
     in step 6 was generated during this step. However, by analysing the intentions and the trigger
     function directly in the code it is possible to see that the desire was evaluated as successful even
     though it is not semantically correct, and is also not general enough to be used in different states
     of the environment.

   • Typology 5: Across all three experiments of typology 5, three desires were able to trigger and
     be evaluated as successful. The first one is correct, both in the function that generates the plan
     and in the trigger function that dictates when it should be executed; in this instance the agent
     was actually able to learn to navigate the map to collect and deliver parcels, and would be able
     to do so without needing to prompt the LLM again. The second desire’s intentions are also able
     to generate a plan that leads to parcels being delivered, but some parts of the trigger function do
     not make sense and render the desire not general enough to be considered a fully learned ability.
     The third desire is not completely correct either as the intentions that generate the plan would
     not work correctly on a different configuration of the map, and the trigger function is partially
     incorrect.

   • Typology 6: In typology 6 only one desire was triggered successfully. This desire consists of
     3 different intentions that should achieve the goal of collecting and delivering parcels while also
     recharging with batteries when needed. Although not optimal, the desire can be considered as a
     learned ability since it would work in different states of the environment and leads the agent to
     complete the given objective. The trigger function is also correct and aligned with the desire’s
     goal.

   • Typology 7: Typology 7 produced two desires triggered and evaluated positively. The first
     desire is correct both in the function that generates the plan and in the trigger function, and
     allows the agent to collect batteries as soon as they appear on the map. The second desire is
     correct but not general since it works only with map configurations that are identical to the one
     in which the desire was generated.

    To summarize, across all experiments of typologies 5 to 8, a total of three abilities can be considered
learned by the agent, which could be used to perform the tasks without needing to prompt the LLM.
The agent learned to:

   • Collect and deliver parcels in typology 5.

                                                    31
   • Collect and deliver parcels while also collecting batteries in typology 6.

   • Collect batteries in typology 7.

Although it might seem that the agent mostly failed in learning, it is important to consider that these
are complex tasks that require the agent to plan and execute multiple steps in the correct order and at
the correct time. On the other hand, the number of attempts that were required to reach this result is
definitely not low, with only three fully correct desires out of the total twelve experiments conducted.
    Another consideration that can be done about the learned desires is that two of them exhibit a
proactive or predictive behaviour. The functions implemented do not search for objects like parcels
or batteries in the map, but instead they navigate the agent to the cells that are supposed to contain
these objects: the parcel spawn cell or the battery spawn cell. This behaviour might not be desirable
in a real-world scenario, but it is an interesting result, nonetheless.
    Overall, the agent is able to achieve the self-proposed goals that end up being aligned with the set
objectives in each experiment. However, the generated code is mostly not general enough to be used
in different states of the environment, meaning that the agent can complete tasks, but often only with
the help of the LLM. The code obtained this way is likely to lead to the desired result but is not good
enough to be considered a learned ability.
4.3.2    Analysis of Desires
To evaluate the quality of the desires generated by the LLM, it is possible to classify them into different
categories, as already explained in Section 3.3.2. The categories that can be identified are:

   • Satisfied: The desire goal description was achieved, as evaluated by the LLM.

   • Not satisfied: The desire goal description was not achieved and the limit of 3 intentions failed
     in a row was reached.

Once a desire is satisfied, its trigger function is generated by the LLM and, depending on the result
of this generation, the desire can be further classified as:

   • Triggerable: The trigger function was generated correctly, and the desire can be triggered in
     future iterations of the control loop during the desire triggering phase.

   • Not Triggerable: The LLM generated a trigger function, but, during testing, the function
     encountered a runtime error, returned a value that was not a boolean, or returned ’False’ when
     given as input the instance of the belief set that was saved when the desire was initially proposed.
     All these three cases lead to an invalid trigger function that cannot be used to trigger the desire
     in future iterations of the control loop.

Desires that are triggerable are not necessarily triggered during the course of the experiment, meaning
that a further distinction can be made:

   • Triggered: During the desire triggering phase, the trigger function associated to the desire
     returned ’True’. When this happens, the desire is triggered, meaning that its intentions create
     and execute a plan that leads, hopefully, to the desire goal being achieved.

   • Untriggered: The trigger function never returned ’True’ in any of the desire triggering phases,
     meaning that the desire was never executed.

Desires that are untriggered are considered to be correct but are never proven to work in a state of
the environment different from the one of the initial desire generation. For this reason, these desires
were not considered as learned abilities in the previous section. Out of the desires that were actually
triggered, a further classification can be made based on the result of the triggered execution:

   • Still Triggerable After: The desire was triggered, executed, and the LLM evaluated that its
     goal was achieved. This category is composed of desires that can be considered learned abilities,
     and are the ones analysed in the previous section.

                                                    32
   • Not Triggerable After: The desire was triggered, executed, but either a runtime error hap-
     pened during execution, or the LLM evaluated that the desire goal was not achieved once it
     finished executing. This category is composed of desires that were believed to be functioning
     but were proven to not work in a different state of the environment.




A triggerable desire that goes untriggered for the whole duration of the experiment does not hold the
same value of a desire that was triggered and was evaluated as still triggerable after. The former is
only potentially working, while the latter has a much greater chance of being an actual learned ability.

    A total of 88 desires were generated across all experiments. The distribution of the desires in the
categories described above is shown in Figure 4.2. It is possible to notice how most of the desires
generated do not even exit the generation phase successfully and are classified as Not satisfied. In
fact, this category of desires is the 37.5% of the total. After a desire is evaluated as Satisfied, it is
very likely that their trigger function is generated correctly as 81.8% of them fall into the Triggerable
category. Out of the triggerable desires, considering only typologies 5 to 8, 90.5% of desires were then
triggered but only 58.3% of those were evaluated as Still Triggerable After the execution. This
means that only 11.3% of the total desires generated were proven to work even after their generation
phase. However, as explained above in the in-depth analysis, only 3 of these 7 desires can actually be
considered learned abilities.




                     Figure 4.2: Number of desires in each category by typology




   Considering the triggered desires, it is possible that they were executed multiple times before
being invalidated. For example, in typology 8 the agent finishes the experiment with only one desire
that was triggered and evaluated as Still Triggerable After, but this desire executed six times
and was always evaluated as successful. For this reason, Figure 4.3 shows the number of triggers
that happened in typologies 5 to 8 and their outcomes. A trigger is a Failure if the desire either
encounters an error during execution, or is evaluated negatively by the LLM, while it is a Success if
the execution terminates correctly and the LLM evaluates that the desire goal was reached.

                                                   33
               Figure 4.3: Number of triggers and their outcomes in typologies 5 to 8

    Tables 4.10, 4.11, 4.12 and 4.13 show the outcome of each trigger in detail. As explained above, a
trigger can fail for one of two reasons: there is a runtime error during execution, or the LLM evaluates
the goal as not reached once the execution terminates. For triggers that failed, the reason for the
failure is reported in the tables. Since all desires are invalidated and are no longer triggerable after
the first failure, some desires were triggered multiple times but ultimately failed in the last execution;
for these desires the reason for the failure in the last trigger is reported. In total, 12 desires were
triggered but then invalidated. Out of these 12, 7 desires encountered an error during execution, and
5 were instead negatively evaluated by the LLM.

   Experiment       Desire Number        # Times Triggered         Outcome        Failure Reason
       1                   1                    1                   Failure       Execution Error
       1                   3                    1                   Success               -
       2                   1                    1                   Failure      Negative Evaluation
       2                   3                    2                   Success               -
       3                   1                    1                   Success               -

                  Table 4.10: Number of triggers and their outcomes for Typology 5


   Experiment       Desire Number        # Times Triggered         Outcome        Failure Reason
       1                   3                    1                   Success               -
       2                   3                    1                   Failure      Negative Evaluation
       3                   1                    1                   Failure       Execution Error
       3                   3                    2                   Failure      Negative Evaluation

                  Table 4.11: Number of triggers and their outcomes for Typology 6


     Experiment       Desire Number        # Times Triggered         Outcome      Failure Reason
         1                   3                    1                   Success            -
         1                   4                    1                   Success            -

                  Table 4.12: Number of triggers and their outcomes for Typology 7

                                                   34
   Experiment       Desire Number       # Times Triggered         Outcome       Failure Reason
       1                   2                   1                   Failure     Negative Evaluation
       1                   4                   1                   Failure      Execution Error
       2                   1                   1                   Failure     Negative Evaluation
       2                   4                   1                   Failure      Execution Error
       3                   2                   1                   Failure      Execution Error
       3                   3                   1                   Failure      Execution Error
       3                   2                   1                   Failure      Execution Error
       3                   8                   6                   Success              -

                 Table 4.13: Number of triggers and their outcomes for Typology 8


4.3.3   Quantitative Analysis of Intentions
Across all experiments, a total of 293 intentions were generated. The number of intentions generated
for experiments of each typology is shown in Figure 4.4. The number of intentions increases with the
complexity of the experiments within the two categories of typologies 1 to 4 and 5 to 7. Especially
when comparing typology 1 with typology 4, and typology 5 with typology 6 or 7. Typology 8 should
not be considered as its experiments are much longer by design.




                         Figure 4.4: Number of intentions for each typology


    When an intention is first generated, a description of its goal is provided along with the function
that should achieve it. This function is executed and the actions are performed by the agent. However,
the execution of the function can fail if any error occurs, and in that case the intention is considered
Not Generated Correctly. The intention falls into the same category even if, after the execution
has terminated, the LLM evaluates that the intention did not achieve its goal. If instead the LLM
evaluates that the intention goal was reached, the intention is considered Generated Correctly and
becomes executable. Figure 4.5 shows the number of intentions generated correctly and not generated
correctly for each typology. The majority of intentions fail to generate correctly; in fact, only 25.9%
of the total intentions were generated correctly. An exception can be observed in typology 1, where
not only the number of intentions generated is the lowest, but also the relative number of correct
generations is the highest: this is probably due to how simple this category of experiments is.

                                                  35
Figure 4.5: Number of intentions generated correctly and not generated correctly for each typology




    When a desire is triggered, only its executable intentions are run. If an error occurs during this
step, the intention that encountered the error will be invalidated and will no longer be executable.
Once generated correctly, intentions are added to the intentions library and are available to be used
and called by future intentions. If an intention is called but an error occurs during its execution, it is
invalidated. These two ways in which an intention can be rendered not executable after its generation
is the reason why the number of executable intentions decreases during the course of the experiments.
Out of the 293 total intentions created, 76 were generated correctly (25.9%), but only 59 were still
executable at the end of the experiment (20.1%). This is shown in Figure 4.6 for typologies 1 to 4,
and in Figure 4.7 for typologies 5 to 8. Since desire triggering is disabled in the first four typologies,
almost all intentions that are generated correctly are still executable at the end of the experiment,
with only one exception: if an intention is called three times in a row by newly generated intentions
and they all fail, the intention called is invalidated as a precaution since it is possible that it is not
actually achieving the goal it is saying to achieve. Differently from typologies 1 to 4, in typologies 5
to 8 the number of executable intentions always decreases, showing that an error during the desire
triggered execution is the most common reason for an intention to be invalidated.

                                                   36
Figure 4.6: Fraction of intentions generated correctly and still executable at the end of the experiment
for typologies 1 to 4




Figure 4.7: Fraction of intentions generated correctly and still executable at the end of the experiment
for typologies 5 to 8


    Given the intentions that were not correctly generated, we can look at what was the cause of the
failure: an error occurred during the execution of the intention function, or the LLM evaluated that
the goal was not reached after the execution. Figure 4.8 shows, out of the 217 intentions that did not
generate correctly (74.1%), what is the reason of this failure. Across all typologies failures by error
and failures by evaluation are somewhat balanced, with a spike of execution errors in typology 5 for
which it was not possible to find an explanation.

                                                  37
                    Figure 4.8: Reasons of failure during generation of intentions

4.3.4    Qualitative Analysis of Intentions
In this section an analysis of the quality of intentions is performed. First by using metrics that measure
complexity in the generated code, and then by comparing between categories of quality, identified by
manually evaluating the intentions.

Quality of Intentions Generated
To evaluate the quality of the intentions generated, we can use Radon [1], a tool that can calculate
different metrics for Python code. Of these metrics, we are interested in the following:

   • Cyclomatic Complexity: Cyclomatic Complexity corresponds to the number of possible de-
     cisions that a block of code contains plus 1. For example, an if statement or a for loop adds
     a value of 1 to the complexity. This number, also called McCabe’s Number, is equal to the
     number of linearly independent paths through the code. The higher the value of the Cyclomatic
     Complexity, the more complex a block of code is.

   • Halstead Effort: The Halstead metrics are based on the number of operators and operands in
     a block of code and consist of a series of measures that can be summarized by the Effort. The
     Effort is a measure that can be translated into the time required to write the code and is based
     on the difficulty of the program to understand and write, and the volume of the code which
     depends on the size of the block. The higher the value of the Halstead Effort, the more complex
     a block of code is.

   • Logical Lines of Code: This metric is simply a measure of the logical lines of code contained
     in a block. The higher the value of the Logical Lines of Code, the longer a block of code is.

   • Maintainability Index: This metric is a combination of Cyclomatic Complexity, Halstead
     Volume and number of source lines of code. It measures how maintainable, how easy to change
     and support, a block of code is. The higher the value of the Maintainability Index, the more
     maintainable a block of code is.

Radon defines a number of ranks for Cyclomatic Complexity scores and for Maintainability Index
values, described in Table 4.14 and Table 4.15.

                                                   38
            Rank     CC score             Risk              Interpretation
             A         1-5                Low               Simple block
             B        6 - 10              Low               Well structured and stable block
             C        11 - 20          Moderate             Slightly complex block
             D        21 - 30      More than moderate       More complex block
             E        31 - 40             High              Complex block, alarming
             F         41+             Very high            Error-prone, unstable block

       Table 4.14: Cyclomatic Complexity (CC) ranks by score and associated interpretation




                                Rank     MI score        Maintainability
                                 A       100 - 20        Very high
                                 B        19 - 10        Medium
                                 C         9-0           Extremely low

                        Table 4.15: Maintainability Index (MI) ranks by score




     Given an intention, we take its associated function and calculate the metrics described above,
and then compute the mean for each metric between intentions that belong to the same typology of
experiments. A confidence interval can also be calculated to show the variability of the metrics within
the typology. The results are shown in Figures 4.9, 4.10, 4.11 and 4.12. The Cyclomatic Complexity
scores mostly fall into the second best rank (B), with the exception of typology 5 where the mean value
is in the third rank (C); as experiments in typologies increase in difficulty of the initial configuration,
the complexity of intentions does not seem to follow the same trend, but remains mostly stable, if not
slightly decreasing. The Halstead Effort shows a similar trend, with values remaining similar across
typologies, with typologies 4 and 8 showing low values, and with typology 5 that is an outlier like
before. The same happens considering the average length of the intention functions, with again the
lowest values being in typology 4 and 8, and the highest in typology 5. The Maintainability Index is
again showing similar results, with all values falling into the best rank defined (A). In maintainability,
typology 6 scores the highest value, which is a result not reflected in the other metrics, for example
with a lower complexity. The variability of the metrics within typologies is shown by the confidence
intervals, which are quite large in all cases, showing that the complexity, length, and maintainability
of intentions changes a lot even within the experiments of the same typology.

                                                    39
Figure 4.9: Mean value and 95% confidence interval of Cyclomatic Complexity for intentions by
typology




 Figure 4.10: Mean value and 95% confidence interval of Halstead Effort for intentions by typology

                                                40
Figure 4.11: Mean value and 95% confidence interval of logical lines of code for intentions by typology




Figure 4.12: Mean value and 95% confidence interval of Maintainability Index for intentions by typol-
ogy


    Regarding experiments of typology 5, this outlier behaviour was already observed in Figure 4.8.
However, this anomaly is not reflected in the number of intentions generated or in the number of
incorrect generations, as Figure 4.5 shows, which is similar to other typologies. Furthermore, the
agent was able to reach all objectives set for this typology, as explained in Table 4.5. The fact that
intentions of typology 5 fail a lot more often due to execution errors, and the fact that they produce
the worst results in all metrics, does not cause the agent to not reach the set objectives and is not
reflected in more incorrect intention generations. This result shows that the quality of the intentions
is not necessarily related to the success of the agent in its evolution process and is also not related to

                                                   41
the complexity of the tasks that the agent has to perform, since typology 5 is the simplest one out of
the last four.

Degradation of Quality of Intentions
Over the course of an experiment, as the agent learns more complex abilities, and as the environment
fills with new spawned objects, one would expect the quality of intentions generated to degrade,
becoming more complex and less maintainable. To test this hypothesis, it is possible to compare the
average metrics of intentions generated in the first half of experiments against the average metrics of
intentions generated in the second half. This comparison is performed using the Student’s T-test. If
it is true that the quality of intentions degrades, then the metrics should be worse in the second half
of the experiments. However, the test showed that there is no significant difference, meaning that
the quality of intentions does not degrade over time. Furthermore, in only once case the p-value was
under the required threshold of 0.05 for at least one of the metrics, and it happened in typology 5,
as shown in Table 4.16. The difference is significant only in the number of lines of code, but it is in
the opposite direction: intentions in this typology are more complex, less maintainable, and longer
in the first half of the experiments. This might be due to the fact that intentions generated later in
the experiment can call other correctly generated intentions that were created before, thus creating
functions that are shorter and simpler.

                        Metric                     T-test Statistic    P-value
                        Cyclomatic Complexity            2.66           0.117
                        Maintainability Index           -3.82           0.062
                        Logical Lines of Code            6.24           0.025
                        Halstead Effort                  0.58           0.621

Table 4.16: Student’s T-test results for metrics comparison between first and second half of intentions
in experiments of typology 5


Comparison between Satisfied and Not Satisfied Desires
As explained before, a desire is considered satisfied if the LLM evaluates that, through the execution of
its intentions, the goal of the desire was achieved. This means that we have intentions that belong to
a satisfied desire, and intentions that belong to a not satisfied desire. We can compare the metrics of
these two groups of intentions to see if there is a significant difference between them. Once again, the
comparison is performed using the Student’s T-test. The number of intentions that belong to satisfied
desires is 78, while the number of intentions that belong to non-satisfied desires is 215. The results
of the test, shown in Table 4.17, do not highlight a significant difference between the two groups,
meaning that the quality of intentions, as measured by the metrics, is not related to the satisfaction
of the desires.

                        Metric                     T-test Statistic    P-value
                        Cyclomatic Complexity           0.685           0.494
                        Maintainability Index           -1.545          0.124
                        Logical Lines of Code           -0.290          0.772
                        Halstead Effort                 0.114           0.910

Table 4.17: Student’s T-test results for metrics comparison between intentions that belong to satisfied
and not satisfied desires


Comparison between Correctly and Not Correctly Generated Intentions
It is possible to perform a similar comparison considering intentions that were generated correctly
against intentions that were not generated correctly. An intention generated correctly is an intention
that did not encounter any error during execution and was evaluated by the LLM as having reached its

                                                   42
goal. The number of intentions generated correctly is 76, while the number of intentions not generated
correctly is 217. The results of the Student’s T-test are shown in Table 4.18. The comparison does
not show a significant difference between the two groups, meaning that the outcome of the generation
process is not related to the quality of the intentions, as measured by the metrics.

                       Metric                    T-test Statistic    P-value
                       Cyclomatic Complexity          -1.797          0.074
                       Maintainability Index          0.551           0.583
                       Logical Lines of Code          -1.480          0.141
                       Halstead Effort                0.629           0.530

Table 4.18: Student’s T-test result for metrics comparison between generated correctly and not gen-
erated correctly intentions


Categorisation by Quality of Intentions
To evaluate the quality of intentions in a way that cannot be measured by the metrics provided
by Radon, it is possible to manually go through all intentions and evaluate them based on how
their associated function accesses the data contained in the belief set. Based on this evaluation, the
intentions can be classified in the following categories:

   • Adaptive: All the information about the environment is obtained accessing the variable con-
     taining the belief set. This function is able to adapt to many states of the environment.

   • Grounded: The function does not access the belief set to obtain all the information it needs
     to execute. For example, the coordinates of a delivery cell are hard coded in the function. This
     function is not able to fully adapt to different states of the environment.

   • Predetermined: The function is simply a list of actions that the agent executes. In this case,
     the LLM, through its ’reasoning’ capabilities, generated the plan that the agent should execute
     by inferring it from the given current belief set. This function cannot adapt to any state of the
     environment.

Examples are provided for each category of functions.

   • Adaptive function

          def function_7():
              global belief_set
              parcel_coordinates = belief_set[’parcel’][1][’coordinates’]
              agent_coordinates = belief_set[’agent’][’coordinates’]
              while agent_coordinates != parcel_coordinates:
                  if agent_coordinates[0] < parcel_coordinates[0]:
                      function_2()
                      agent_coordinates[0] += 1
                  elif agent_coordinates[0] > parcel_coordinates[0]:
                      function_1()
                      agent_coordinates[0] -= 1
                  if agent_coordinates[1] < parcel_coordinates[1]:
                      function_4()
                      agent_coordinates[1] += 1
                  elif agent_coordinates[1] > parcel_coordinates[1]:
                      function_3()
                      agent_coordinates[1] -= 1
              function_5()


                                                 43
   • Grounded function

          def function_34():
              global belief_set
              if belief_set[’agent’][’coordinates’] == [0, 0] and len(belief_set[
                  ’agent’][’parcels_carried_ids’]) > 0:
                  function_6()
              else:
                  function_11()
              if belief_set[’agent’][’energy’] < 50 and belief_set[’agent’][’coordinates’
                  ] != [3, 2]:
                  function_2() if belief_set[’agent’][’coordinates’][0] < [3, 2][0
                      ] else function_1()
                  function_4() if belief_set[’agent’][’coordinates’][1] < [3, 2][1
                      ] else function_3()
                  function_5()



   • Predetermined function

          def function_23():
              global belief_set
              function_1()
              function_2()
              function_2()
              function_5()



    Table 4.19 shows the number of intentions that fall into the Grounded or Predetermined cate-
gories for each typology. In total, out of the 293 intentions generated, 21 are either Grounded or
Predetermined (7.2%).

                                 Typology      Number Intentions
                                    1                 0
                                    2                 0
                                    3                 1
                                    4                 4
                                    5                 5
                                    6                 7
                                    7                 1
                                    8                 3

             Table 4.19: Number of Grounded or Predetermined intentions by Typology

    During the manual evaluation, it was noticed that many of these non-adaptive intentions were
generated towards the end of the experiments. To validate this observation, it is possible to count how
many of these fall into the last n1 generated intentions during each experiment, and then compare with
an expected count calculated assuming that the likelihood of generating a Grounded or Predetermined
intention is constant over the course of the experiment. The result of this analysis is shown in Table
4.20. In all cases, the expected count is much lower that the count reported in conducted experiments.
A reason for this could be that, as the experiment progresses, objects get spawned over time and the
belief set is filled with entries, which means that prompts get longer and more complex to interpret
for the LLM, leading to worse functions being created.

                                                  44
                     Value of n     Number of Intentions          Expected Count
                         2              12/21 - 0.57                    0.5
                         3              9/21 - 0.43                    0.33
                         4              9/21 - 0.43                    0.25
                         5              8/21 - 0.38                     0.2
                         6              8/21 - 0.38                    0.17
                         7              8/21 - 0.38                    0.14
                         8              7/21 - 0.33                    0.13

Table 4.20: Number of Grounded or Predetermined intentions found in the last n1 of generated inten-
tions, with n increasing from 2 to 8

    By grouping all intentions into the three categories identified above, it is possible to compute the
metrics for each category and compare the mean values. Results are shown in Table 4.21. Considering
the confidence intervals, there are no clear differences between the three categories in any of the metrics.
This means that the quality of intentions, measured by the metrics chosen, cannot be used to recognize
Grounded intentions from Adaptive ones, highlighting a limitation in the evaluation performed using
metrics only.

                     Cyclomatic          Maintainability         Logical Lines              Halstead
   Category
                     Complexity               Index                 of Code                   Effort
   Adaptive        9.16 [8.60, 9.71]    58.97 [57.74, 60.20]   19.06 [18.10, 20.02]   372.56 [313.72, 431.41]
   Grounded        8.65 [6.26, 11.04]   58.08 [53.95, 62.22]   20.12 [14.93, 25.31]   335.00 [161.45, 508.55]
 Predetermined     2.75 [1.23, 4.27]    72.38 [61.76, 83.00]    9.00 [4.69, 13.31]     17.00 [-26.32, 60.32]

      Table 4.21: Mean and 95% confidence interval of metrics for each category of intentions.

    Another interesting kind of analysis involves taking into consideration the goal description as-
sociated to each intention. When generated by the LLM, an intention is returned with a textual
description of its goal, and with the function that should achieve it. One would expect the description
to reflect in some way the function associated. For each description, two metrics can be calculated:
the number of text characters contained, or the number of objectives mentioned. The first value is
simple to obtain, while the second one requires to manually count of how many steps the description
is composed. For example, the description
    The agent should strive to collect as many parcels as possible from the parcels spawn point and
deliver them to their respective destinations while maintaining a high energy level.
is 180 characters long and can be divided into 3 objectives: collect parcels, deliver parcels, maintain
high energy level. These two values can be computed for all descriptions and can be used to compute
the average number of objectives and the average description length for intentions that are Adaptive,
Grounded, or Predetermined. The mean values and 95% confidence intervals for each category are
shown in Table 4.22. The difference between the categories is clearly visible between Adaptive and
Grounded intentions, with the latter having longer descriptions and more objectives. This means that
the difference in quality between these two categories of intentions is not reflected in the metrics of
the functions, but can be observed by analysing the descriptions associated to them.

                   Category         Number of Objectives          Description Length
                   Adaptive            3.14 [2.97, 3.31]          172.99 [164.37, 181.60]
                   Grounded            4.53 [3.58, 5.48]          226.12 [193.68, 258.56]
                 Predetermined         4.00 [2.70, 5.30]          207.75 [122.02, 293.48]

Table 4.22: Mean and 95% confidence interval of number of objectives and description length for each
category of intentions.

    To further highlight the difference, it is possible to only consider intentions that contain no calls
to other previously generated intentions. Intentions containing calls are probably much shorter and

                                                    45
less complex than intentions that contain no calls since they are built on top of working functions,
and for this reason do not reflect the length of their description. By removing these intentions, we
obtain a reduced pool of 224 intentions from the initial 293. With this new set of functions we can
compute the average Radon metrics, average number of objectives, and average description length, for
Adaptive, Grounded, and Predetermined intentions. The results are shown in Tables 4.23, 4.24, 4.25,
and 4.26; the metrics already explained above are also reported for comparison. The same conclusion
can be drawn: the metrics computed on Adaptive and Grounded intentions show similar values, while
the difference between the average number of objectives and the average description length is even
more pronounced when considering only the reduced pool of intentions.

                                              Cyclomatic Complexity
                                                All             Reduced
                            Adaptive     9.16 [8.60, 9.71] 10.03 [9.42, 10.63]
                           Grounded      8.65 [6.26, 11.04] 10.08 [7.11, 13.06]
                       Predetermined     2.75 [1.23, 4.27]   4.00 [nan, nan]

Table 4.23: Comparison of Cyclomatic Complexity between Adaptive, Grounded and Predetermined
intentions, when considering all intentions (All) and when considering the reduced pool of intentions
without calls to other functions (Reduced). The mean value and the 95% confidence interval are
shown.


                                               Maintainability Index
                                               All              Reduced
                           Adaptive    58.97 [57.74, 60.20] 56.17 [55.40, 56.94]
                          Grounded     58.08 [53.95, 62.22] 55.16 [50.73, 59.60]
                      Predetermined    72.38 [61.76, 83.00]  63.15 [nan, nan]

Table 4.24: Comparison of Maintainability Index between Adaptive, Grounded and Predetermined
intentions, when considering all intentions (All) and when considering the reduced pool of intentions
without calls to other functions (Reduced). The mean value and the 95% confidence interval are
shown.


                                               Logical Lines of Code
                                               All              Reduced
                           Adaptive    19.06 [18.10, 20.02] 20.66 [19.66, 21.66]
                          Grounded     20.12 [14.93, 25.31] 23.25 [16.86, 29.64]
                      Predetermined     9.00 [4.69, 13.31]   13.00 [nan, nan]

Table 4.25: Comparison of Logical Lines of Code between Adaptive, Grounded and Predetermined
intentions, when considering all intentions (All) and when considering the reduced pool of intentions
without calls to other functions (Reduced). The mean value and the 95% confidence interval are
shown.


                                                   Halstead Effort
                                              All                 Reduced
                       Adaptive     372.56 [313.72, 431.41] 426.49 [354.37, 498.61]
                      Grounded      335.00 [161.45, 508.55] 432.94 [207.15, 658.73]
                  Predetermined      17.00 [-26.32, 60.32]     57.66 [nan, nan]

Table 4.26: Comparison of Halstead Effort between Adaptive, Grounded and Predetermined inten-
tions, when considering all intentions (All) and when considering the reduced pool of intentions without
calls to other functions (Reduced). The mean value and the 95% confidence interval are shown.

                                                  46
                                                Number of Objectives
                                                   All           Reduced
                               Adaptive     3.14 [2.97, 3.31] 2.93 [2.75, 3.12]
                              Grounded      4.53 [3.58, 5.48] 4.83 [3.60, 6.07]
                          Predetermined     4.00 [2.70, 5.30] 3.00 [nan, nan]

Table 4.27: Comparison of Number of Objectives between Adaptive, Grounded and Predetermined
intentions, when considering all intentions (All) and when considering the reduced pool of intentions
without calls to other functions (Reduced). The mean value and the 95% confidence interval are
shown.


                                                  Description Length
                                               All                 Reduced
                        Adaptive     172.99 [164.37, 181.60] 160.75 [151.75, 169.76]
                       Grounded      226.12 [193.68, 258.56] 240.92 [202.65, 279.18]
                   Predetermined     207.75 [122.02, 293.48]   172.00 [nan, nan]

Table 4.28: Comparison of Description Length between Adaptive, Grounded and Predetermined in-
tentions, when considering all intentions (All) and when considering the reduced pool of intentions
without calls to other functions (Reduced). The mean value and the 95% confidence interval are
shown.

Metrics of Intentions Grouped by Description Length or by Number of Objectives
Intentions that have longer descriptions, both in terms of number of characters and number of objec-
tives, are expected to be associated with functions that are also longer and more complex. To test this,
it is possible to group intentions based on the number of objectives mentioned in their description, or
based on the length of the description, and plot the average metrics for each group. The same can
be done only considering intentions that do not contain calls to other functions. Figures 4.13, 4.14,
4.15, 4.16, 4.17, 4.18, 4.19, and 4.20 show the average metrics for intentions grouped by number of
objectives of their description, first considering all intentions, and then considering only intentions
without calls. The same analysis is performed grouping intentions by description lengths, with results
shown in Figures 4.21, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 4.25, 4.26, 4.27, and 4.28. For some values the confidence
interval is not shown because too big to be displayed or not computable. The binning employed in the
graphs showing metrics by description length aims at having a similar number of intentions in each
bin, reason why the bins are not of equal size.
     When grouped by number of objectives, metrics clearly show that, as descriptions get longer,
their associated functions worsen in complexity and maintainability. This trend is even clearer when
considering only intentions without calls, with values that highlight even higher complexity and lower
maintainability when compared to the metrics computed on all intentions.
     If all intentions are grouped by description length, the metrics show a similar but less clear trend.
However, it is still possible to conclude that intentions associated to the shortest descriptions are less
complex than the rest, and that their maintainability is higher. Since the number of intentions is
reduced when considering only intentions without calls, only six bins are employed in this case, but
with each bin containing a very similar number of intentions to before. The trend is a lot clearer in
this case with also less variability in the metrics.
     Overall, it is possible to conclude that the description associated to a function is a more telling
indicator of complexity than the function itself. Some conclusions can be drawn from these results:
Given an intention, it is not possible to predict if it will be Adaptive, Grounded or Predetermined
by only looking at the metrics computed with Radon on its associated function. If it belongs to the
Grounded category, it will have on average a longer and more complex description that an Adaptive
intention. Intentions that have a shorter and less complex description are more likely to be associated
with functions that are also less complex and more maintainable. However, this last statement is
applicable mostly to intentions that do not contain calls to other functions.

                                                   47
Figure 4.13: Cyclomatic Complexity of intentions grouped by number of objectives of their description




Figure 4.14: Cyclomatic Complexity of intentions without calls grouped by number of objectives of
their description

                                                 48
   Figure 4.15: Halstead Effort of intentions grouped by number of objectives of their description




Figure 4.16: Halstead Effort of intentions without calls grouped by number of objectives of their
description

                                                 49
Figure 4.17: Logical Lines of Code of intentions grouped by number of objectives of their description




Figure 4.18: Logical Lines of Code of intentions without calls grouped by number of objectives of their
description

                                                  50
Figure 4.19: Maintainability Index of intentions grouped by number of objectives of their description




Figure 4.20: Maintainability Index of intentions without calls grouped by number of objectives of their
description

                                                  51
      Figure 4.21: Cyclomatic Complexity of intentions grouped by description length




Figure 4.22: Cyclomatic Complexity of intentions without calls grouped by description length

                                            52
      Figure 4.23: Halstead Effort of intentions grouped by description length




Figure 4.24: Halstead Effort of intentions without calls grouped by description length

                                         53
      Figure 4.25: Logical Lines of Code of intentions grouped by description length




Figure 4.26: Logical Lines of Code of intentions without calls grouped by description length

                                            54
           Figure 4.27: Maintainability Index of intentions grouped by description length




    Figure 4.28: Maintainability Index of intentions without calls grouped by description length

4.3.5   Analysis of Intentions With Calls
An intention with calls is an intention whose function contains at least one call to another intention’s
function that was generated correctly in previous iterations. The number of intentions with calls is 69
out of the total 293. A function that contains calls is expected to be shorter, simpler, and is expected
to have a much lower failure rate due to the use of functions that were verified to work correctly.
However, Table 4.29 shows that intentions with calls are generated correctly less often than intentions
without calls. This is opposite of what was expected. One reason for this might be that the function
included as a call does not produce the expected result without causing a runtime error, thus not
leading to achievement of the newly generated intention. If this is the case, then it would be expected

                                                  55
that intentions with calls fail more often due to a negative evaluation rather than due to an execution
error. So, considering the intentions that did not generate correctly, we can look at the reason for
the failure, as shown in Table 4.30. As we can observe, intentions with calls fail because of a negative
evaluation more often that intentions without calls, not disproving the hypothesis proposed above.

                                       Generated Correctly        Not Generated Correctly
         Intentions with Calls                0.159                        0.841
       Intentions without Calls               0.290                        0.710

Table 4.29: Fraction of intentions that were generated correctly or not generated correctly, for inten-
tions with and without calls


                                            Execution Error       Negative Evaluation
               Intentions with Calls             0.293                   0.707
             Intentions without Calls            0.472                   0.528

     Table 4.30: Reason for failure in the generation phase for intentions with and without calls

   Finally, we can look at how many lines of code a function containing calls has, compared to a
function that does not contain calls. The results are shown in Table 4.31. Intentions with calls are,
on average, much shorter.

                                                           Lines of Code
                            Intentions with Calls        13.22 [11.38 - 15.06]
                          Intentions without Calls       20.76 [19.77 - 21.75]

Table 4.31: Mean and 95% confidence interval of lines of code for intentions with and without calls




                                                  56
5        Conclusion
The agent architecture developed has the capabilities of acting autonomously in a dynamic environ-
ment, achieving the self-proposed goals. However, it mostly remains dependent on the LLM to plan
its actions. Its ability to learn how to operate in a fully autonomous way is limited, as shown in
the analysis of the results obtained from the experiments conducted. Nevertheless, this represents a
small but significant step towards automating software development processes, which could improve
scalability and efficiency.

   The next sections describe the issues observed in the experiments conducted and propose im-
provements that might mitigate or solve them, helping to achieve a more effective software evolution
process.

Memory and Context Awareness

When a new requirement is proposed, the agent leverages the LLM to generate functions that, when
executed, should produce the necessary plans to achieve them. Most of the code was able to run
without errors, but sometimes entering infinite loops caused by while statements with conditions that
could never be met. This issue was solved with the introduction of a limit of 15 seconds for the
execution of code, after which an execution error was triggered. This particular problem was caused
by how the information in the belief set was accessed, causing the exit conditions to not read the
correct values. Normally, a human developer would notice this error, infer the cause, come up with a
solution, and adjust the future developed functions to not encounter this problem again. However, this
is really not an easy task when prompting an LLM that has no context on what happened in the past.
A partial fix, which is provided by the Memory component of the architecture, was to introduce an
additional step in which the LLM, given the function and the error that occured, proposes suggestions
on how to solve the prolem. This information is saved and then included in the next prompt to
condition the function generation that should not run into the same problem. After that, the memory
is erased since the suggestions are relevant only for the current state of the environment and for the
current pursued goals. Having the LLM infer and recognize that the problem will persist and that
adjustments will have to be continuosly made is incredibly arduous. Understanding how to fix an
error like this, and being able to abstract and infer the reason why it happened, making it not specific
for the function that encountered the error, is simple for humans that are aware of the context of the
software system, but is just not possible for an LLM. To give the same ability to an LLM, a framework
would require many complex prompts to obtain feedback that is then implemented and evaluated, in
a constant loop that needs to check whether what it is doing is actually correct. And even in that
case, there is no guarantee that the process will converge to a correct solution. In other words, the
need to subdivide a task into many smaller problems to solve independently, making them digestable
to LLMs, arises due to technical limitations of these models that, this way, become unaware of the
bigger picture. Awareness of what happened in previous iterations, and the ability to infer knowledge
applicable to future generations is the key to solve this problem.

Language Specific Issues

As explained in the previous section, the LLM had trouble generating functions in which the belief set
is accessed correctly. In fact, this was the source of many problems, and its resolution was not possible
even after fine-tuning the prompts in an attempt of influencing the LLM. For context, the belief set is
a Python dictionary that is updated by the perception unit of the architecture. The structure is then
given as example in the prompts to allow the LLM to use the correct keys to access the dictionary

                                                   57
and obtain the desired information. Problems arise when the LLM decides to copy the content of the
belief set into locally defined variables, and then use those variables to perform checks on the state of
the environment. In Python, this operation creates a copy of the values contained in the belief set that
are not updated when the environment changes. This issue remarks some limitations in the technical
expertise of the LLM itself, and might be solvable by adopting another programming language, or by
making different implementation choices in which this problem cannot happen.


Limitations of Pathfinding Solutions Implemented

To achieve the objectives set in the experiments, the agent needs to navigate the map to interact with
the objects that are present. However, a problem arose due to how the movement on the map was
achieved, and it could not be resolved. In all experiments, the LLM only implemented a very basic
pathfinding algorithm: if a cell was blocked by an obstacle that required the agent to move around
it, then that cell was effectively unreachable. This problem could not be solved since more precise
instructions on how to move on the map would make the architecture work with only the specific
environment employed. And even in that case, the LLM might still not be capable enough of building
more complex solutions to handle sophisticated pathfinding.


Feedback Between Perception and Control Units

The agent consists of two units: perception and control. The first one is responsible for handling
incoming events and integrating the information carried into the beliefs set. The second one is re-
sponsible for generating goals and producing the appropriate plans to achieve them. In the current
implementation these two units do not interact since they have different tasks and are independent of
each other. However, an improvement that might benefit the agent consists in adding a component
that enables the interaction between the units. As of now, the control unit utilizes the information
that is saved by the perception unit but has no say in how the information should be saved; for ex-
ample, structuring differently the belief set in a way that better fits the environment could improve
efficiency and performance. This component, that would act as internal feedback, could help improve
the agent’s internal representation, but not without complexity coming from the required additional
prompts and steps to make this process function correctly.


Learning of Environment-Specific Information

The environment in which the agent was tested is very simple and straightforward, with elements that
do not need an explanation to know how they can be interacted with. For example, if us humans are
presented with two objects, a key and a door, and we are only perfmitted to perform a handful of
actions like pick-up and put-down, the objective is clear to us: get the key and leave it at the door.
This is also true for the LLM. If, instead, the environment were more complex, containing objects
whose functions are not immediately obvious, the agent would not be able to rely on trial and error
to learn how to interact with them, since this is not implemented in the architecture. As explained
before, the memory component has the limited use of providing feedback to fix the code generated
between one iteration and the following, but is erased right after it is used. This implementation does
not correspond to how it was imagined originally: the initial idea was to have a permanent memory
updated by the LLM with the information that it deemed relevant about effects of its actions, details
of interactions, and general mechanics of the game. However, this failed due to the inability of the
LLM to recognize what information was valid only in the current state of the environment, and what
instead were general mechanics of the game. A partial cause of this problem can be identified in the
limitations of prompts made: when requested to come up with this general information about the
environment, the LLM is given only a snapshot with the current state that, by definition, cannot
capture temporal information. This aspect is further discussed in the next section.

                                                   58
Lack of Temporal Dimensionality
Let’s say, for example, that parcels spawn at set intervals of 10 seconds. How can the agent learn this
information? In the proposed architecture this is simply not possible. A fix for this issue could be to
prompt with a time series describing all changes that happen, but this solution would probably exceed
the context window limitation of current LLMs with big enough environments, and optimizations to
the input information would be heavily dependent on the nature of the environment.

Assumption About Agent’s Actions
An important assumption made is about the actions that the agent can perform in the environment
it operates in. The user needs to specify what effect each action has to allow the LLM to correctly
generate plans. However, this might not be always possible. Environments that are unknown both to
humans and to the agent, where it is not possible to know in advance the result of executing an action,
would require an additional component in which the LLM keeps keeps track of this information. But,
as discussed before, this introduces complexity and is not trivial to implement correctly. In fact, an
attempt was made to try and let the LLM figure out what the effects of the available actions were, but
it failed because of the inability of the LLM to recognize and generalize them so that the information
could be used in future code generations.


    While the agent shows potential for evolution and adaptability, it is not able of the desired scala-
bility and robustness. Improving context-awareness and overcoming the technical limitations is fun-
damental to the creation of an agent capable of operating autonomously in complex and dynamic
environments. Improvements should involve the integration of components and mechanisms that help
the LLM generalize better from the given information and understand the temporal properties of
the environment. Future work must focus on these aspects to bridge the gap between LLM-based
architectures and fully autonomous agents.




                                                  59
Bibliography

 [1] Welcome to radon’s documentation! https://radon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/. Radon 4.1.0 doc-
     umentation.
 [2] Lenz Belzner, Thomas Gabor, and Martin Wirsing. Large language model assisted software
     engineering: prospects, challenges, and a case study. In International Conference on Bridging the
     Gap between AI and Reality, pages 355–374. Springer, 2023.
 [3] Michael Bratman. Intention, Plans, and Practical Reason. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
     Press, Cambridge, 1987.
 [4] Michael E Bratman, David J Israel, and Martha E Pollack. Plans and resource-bounded practical
     reasoning. Computational intelligence, 4(3):349–355, 1988.
 [5] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
     wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
     Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
     Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
     Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
     Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020.
 [6] Jim Buckley, Tom Mens, Matthias Zenger, Awais Rashid, and Günter Kniesel. Towards a taxon-
     omy of software change. Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice,
     17(5):309–332, 2005.
 [7] Ned Chapin, Joanne E Hale, Khaled Md Khan, Juan F Ramil, and Wui-Gee Tan. Types of
     software evolution and software maintenance. Journal of software maintenance and evolution:
     Research and Practice, 13(1):3–30, 2001.
 [8] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
     Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
     language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
 [9] Cédric Colas, Laetitia Teodorescu, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Xingdi Yuan, and Marc-Alexandre Côté.
     Augmenting autotelic agents with large language models. In Conference on Lifelong Learning
     Agents, pages 205–226. PMLR, 2023.
[10] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
     bidirectional transformers for language understanding, 2019.
[11] Thomas Dohmke.            Github copilot is generally available to all developers.
     https://github.blog/news-insights/product-news/github-copilot-is-generally-available-to-all-
     developers/, June 2022. Updated on May 21, 2024.
[12] Stan Franklin and Art Graesser. Is it an agent, or just a program?: A taxonomy for autonomous
     agents. In International workshop on agent theories, architectures, and languages, pages 21–35.
     Springer, 1996.
[13] Erik Hemberg, Stephen Moskal, and Una-May O’Reilly. Evolving code with a large language
     model. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines, 25(2):21, 2024.

                                                 60
[14] Carl Hewitt. Viewing control structures as patterns of passing messages. Artificial intelligence,
     8(3):323–364, 1977.

[15] S Hochreiter. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation MIT-Press, 1997.

[16] Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-
     shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International conference
     on machine learning, pages 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022.

[17] Yuan Huang, Yinan Chen, Xiangping Chen, Junqi Chen, Rui Peng, Zhicao Tang, Jinbo Huang,
     Furen Xu, and Zibin Zheng. Generative software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02583,
     2024.

[18] David Kinny, Michael Georgeff, and Anand Rao. A methodology and modelling technique for
     systems of bdi agents. In European workshop on modelling autonomous agents in a multi-agent
     world, pages 56–71. Springer, 1996.

[19] Manny M Lehman. Laws of software evolution revisited. In European workshop on software
     process technology, pages 108–124. Springer, 1996.

[20] Meir M Lehman. Programs, cities, students—limits to growth? In Programming Methodology: A
     Collection of Articles by Members of IFIP WG2. 3, pages 42–69. Springer, 1978.

[21] Meir M Lehman. Programs, life cycles, and laws of software evolution. Proceedings of the IEEE,
     68(9):1060–1076, 1980.

[22] Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone.
     Llm+ p: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2304.11477, 2023.

[23] Vadim Liventsev, Anastasiia Grishina, Aki Härmä, and Leon Moonen. Fully autonomous pro-
     gramming with large language models. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Compu-
     tation Conference, pages 1146–1155, 2023.

[24] Hyacinth S Nwana. Software agents: An overview. The knowledge engineering review, 11(3):205–
     244, 1996.

[25] OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt. https://openai.com/index/chatgpt/, November 2022. Accessed on
     November 18, 2024.

[26] Alec Radford and Karthik Narasimhan. Improving language understanding by generative pre-
     training. 2018.

[27] Anand S. Rao and Michael P. Georgeff. Modeling rational agents within a bdi-architecture. In
     Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation
     and Reasoning, KR’91, page 473–484, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1991. Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
     lishers Inc.

[28] Anand S Rao and Michael P Georgeff. Bdi agents: from theory to practice. In Icmas, volume 95,
     pages 312–319, 1995.

[29] David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning internal representa-
     tions by error propagation, parallel distributed processing, explorations in the microstructure of
     cognition, ed. de rumelhart and j. mcclelland. vol. 1. 1986. Biometrika, 71(599-607):6, 1986.

[30] Mike Schuster and Kuldip K Paliwal. Bidirectional recurrent neural networks. IEEE transactions
     on Signal Processing, 45(11):2673–2681, 1997.

[31] Yoav Shoham. Agent-oriented programming. Artificial intelligence, 60(1):51–92, 1993.

                                                  61
[32] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
     Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, et al. Gemini: a family of highly
     capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.

[33] Camilo Thorne. The bdi model of agency and bdi logics. Technical report, Technical report.
     Trento, Italy: Laboratory for Applied Ontology. Available . . . , 2005.

[34] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
     Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and
     efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023.

[35] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
     Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need, 2023.

[36] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
     Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in
     neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.

[37] Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The
     knowledge engineering review, 10(2):115–152, 1995.




                                                62
